OK. This is CIG's problem - they aren't making a game like any other. Those who don't understand, that won't accept it... you see it's a Catch 22. Can't accept, won't accept, can't understand, won't understand. No answer will satisfy because they just won't believe it. When some try to explain it they think you're an idiot.

Implicit in the 'when' is the 'how much'. How much is it different to other games? If that difference is significant it is impossible to compare development time to other games. Squadron 42 is way more full of stuff than anything anyone has ever seen... it doesn't tell you much to say that though.

Implicit in the 'when' is 'how big'. How much bigger is the game in terms of gameplay content and play area than other games? You have to really drill down into the features list to even get an idea, and there are lots of features that aren't on the roadmap or mentioned explicitly in any CIG output since 2015. For example, you know about the simpods, you know that they are used for military training and performance evaluation post mission... but what very few realise is, they are also used for in-game entertainment. Arena Commander is in Squadron 42, and more than what the current Arena Commander has. The Spectrum is in Squadron 42 and it's full of stuff, it's your window into the game universe that has things constantly going on. You might think to yourself, why did they write a story about 2 female characters, engage voice actors, make a 15 minute cinematic video just to sell a ship they don't even mention by name? They didn't. That's not what it is for. Why do they have the writers spending time writing a story about 3 children in 'A gift for Baba'? If the priority is Squadron 42 and getting the game finished?

If you stop and think about why they put arcade machines in the game, why there are simpods in the game, what all that entertainment and lore is about a realisation should occur - it's obviously not the case that you are rushing mission to mission with at best a 3D environment as a virtually un-interactable wait screen until you choose your next mission, like a Call of Duty Infinite Warfare.

You play the same character, if you choose to, in Star Citizen that you created in Squadron 42. The two games are inter-connected, the experience of Squadron 42 will be reflected in your experience of the PU. What you do in Squadron 42 matters to your experience in Star Citizen, and it isn't just a case of unlocking a few in-game items, or how the NPC's address you, it's far reaching.

In both games you have a complete player history log, if you play Squadron 42 your military history log and 'collectibles' goes with you when you retire to the PU. They know you, Squadron 42 exploits are famous, they know what you did. Some AI in Star Citizen may think you are a hero, some may think you are a UEE scumbag sent to oppress them.

The same political structures, social structures and military structures are in both games, the same places, some of the same factions and even some of the same characters. As well as your rank in Squadron 42 there are things you can unlock which give you access to things in the PU those who didn't play Squadron 42 either won't have access to, or will have to work much harder to attain. There is no way to be 'ex-military' in the PU without starting Squadron 42.

He keeps asking how is it that Zyloh could say that he played the missions for Squadron 42? It's because there isn't one linear path, you have objectives, but you choose how you achieve those objectives within the time allotted, so each chapter, mission etc is built as a layer cake, the essentials go in first - minimal blockout, then they come back and add another layer and another, all the while refining and refining. That's why it seems they keep returning to the same things over and over.

The game is about characters, who you interact with, how you interact with them, who you choose to take sides with, who you choose to call friends, you will have choices to make that directly affect your relationships with those characters - it all affects how the game unfolds for you. Yes the main story plot points happen at their time, but how you experience them depends on you. If you simply follow orders to the letter you'll experience the game one way, if you go in squared jawed Roger-Ramjet style you'll experience a different game, if you go sleuthing around James Bond style you'll experience the game another way.

The chapters are blocks of time which are punctuated by key events you can't fast forward, you can't jump back you can only pause time when you exit the game (and probably while in the simpod), they aren't simply a chain of events you trigger when you're ready like other role play action games. Things happen in 'game time', you have time off duty. That's what all the entertainment stuff is about. That's what all the AI work is about, they aren't background activity to make the game seem alive while you compete in your missions - Go kill!, they are the game. They are the reason you're there.

There are optional side-quests and missions, and whether or how you do those affects your progress in the whole campaign and your history log. No two players will have exactly the same game experience of Squadron 42. Once you have made your choice about what you want to do in Squadron 42 that choice is now locked, you can't go back and test all the other choices. If you rush through mission objectives you're going to miss things, things that affect what happens later down the line, and even in the PU. The only way to check all options is to start the whole game again from the very beginning with a brand new character again and again and again, because you are under a time constraint for your objectives you can't do everything.

Zyloh has access to the console, which means he can jump from point to point to test the basics, the skeleton as it were in a virtually greybox environment.

When the OP talks about, this is where you start the game, your home ship when they talk about chapters 1- 5 that's misleading. You don't start Squadron 42 as a UEEN pilot, but you are a UEEN pilot by chapter 4 (the vertical slice mission). Your 'home' changes throughout the game. We already know this from information already given, but you have to pay attention to catch it.

"I see you've applied to the flight academy again" - Why would an existing navy pilot apply to the flight academy?

'Cal is my wingman'. The game is called Squadron 42. Squadron 42 are not based aboard the Stanton. Squadron 42 fly F8A Lightnings, Idrises don't carry F8A's, only Bengals or bigger.

When people ask about 'when' the game will be ready they aren't taking into account that Squadron 42 is not an on rails 'tunnel type' game. It is a game universe where you have objectives that say be here, at a certain time to achieve your objective. It is being built as a living breathing universe, all the characters, social structures, places and infrastructure of that game universe are in Squadron 42. Things you'll be spending time doing don't necessarily relate to 'missions', but they will form a large part of your game experience. The Spectrum for example. It's the internet in the game universe, and it's nothing like the GTA V version of an in-game internet.

Squadron 42 will be the first taste of that living breathing fully fleshed out universe that is coming to Star Citizen, it will completely change how players experience the game universe. How they make decisions, how they go about things, how they make choices, how they inform themselves, it's the why of being there, who they are in a game universe full of totally unique characters all living their lives, with their own story to tell. Your relationship builds with those characters the more time you put into it, that's why they keep saying, there are no background characters in Squadron 42 (it's not strictly true, there are crowds, there are AI you won't be able to delve into). There are more characters to engage with than any 50 AAA games combined.

There is more gameplay in one chapter of Squadron 42 than most AAA games have in a whole game and there is far too much to do in that game universe than you could possibly get through in one playthrough. It's so big, detailed and fully immersive it beggars description, but they won't tell you because to do so gives away too much they don't want spoiled, but it's there. All those lore posts, all those events, sporting calendar, all those holidays, all those characters from Imperator, media personalities, crewmates and on down to baristas and barman... all in that game universe and they've only shown a small sample of it all.

If you ask any of the dev team about the experience of Squadron 42 the word they keep returning to is - first they sigh, look up to the ceiling then they say 'It's massive'... and these guy know more about all games than you can shake a stick at.

Breadcrumbs. Some just like the idea of a new trail, nothing wrong with that, any excuse to walk the dog is a good excuse.

There be Mockinjays in those woods.

I like magpies, they collect shiny things and take them to their friends. People have even trained them to steal.

1 for sorrow, 2 for joy, 3 for a girl and 4 for a boy, 5 for silver, 6 for gold, 7 for a secret never to be told.

It's not a leak. It's an official announcement.

Patch 3.21 has been released to a PTU. It's a patch that will connect to the game in a different way to what we've had before.

Yes, it may take a lot of cooking. But at least that technology they have been talking about is in a state to let players test it.. so that's new.

They talk about a plan - Don't believe them!
They show progress on the plan - Don't believe them!
They put it in the game build and internally test it - Don't believe them!
They let players test it - Don't believe them!

OK fine... you do you. Bah humbug.

I think they wanted to get into players hands to test it because they know it's the base for the next major content drop yet it's brand new and may take a while to stabilise. Seen it before.

We are allowed to ask why. It's kinda an individual rights thing.

I think the why is because they have a lot of stages to test and they want to get started in the hope it's all done and stable, ready for a content drop for the holidays. But that's just my 2 cents. Someone might mock me and think I'm naive. I might shake my head and think some are just too negative and jaded. We could say it about any game, any politicians promise. If that approach to life gets you through. OK.

Some of us can manage a little disappointment if we had held out a little hope and it didn't happen. Even immersing yourself in the technicality of it has some extrinsic value. Maybe the tide is turning, maybe it's not. A little paddle never hurt anyone, not really. I like surprises but I don't cry myself to sleep if they don't come.

But it is new, it will get the Youtubers fired up. No denying that. Already seen it. The salty became sweet for a while. I always like to see Montoya. He'll be a definite show. They make greetings cards out of a picture of tiny faces pressed against a Victorian shoppe in the snow, no-one hangs a picture of the grumpy old kicked dog hiding in his hole. There'll be some faces at the window, despite the growling.

Why do they put pictures of scruffy half starved little mites against a frozen window of a pie shoppe on holiday cards? I think it's because for a moment we can feel warm thinking that if we were there, we'd give them a hot pie to warm their little bellies. We're inside, we only have to open the door. I hope I would, and that's the thing about hope it's better than free. you can give as much to as many as you like, whenever you like, yet you always have more than enough left over for yourself if you don't let someone take it away from you.

It can and it can't. The Replication Layer can't stop the client disconnect happening if it's between the client and the RL, but it can help stop you losing progress because when you log back in or reconnect everything persisted just where you left it, including you (the player avatar)... depending on how long it takes you to log back in. Someone might come along and pinch your stuff. Your ship might have been stored.. as far as the RL is concerned you alt-F4'd. If you're not connected to the RL, it doesn't know you got a client side 30K notification.

Don't flatter yourself, but thanks for the admission that you find it hard to follow a reasoned argument. However you still miss those nuances. I'm sorry but the word count limit doesn't allow me to keep spelling it out letter by letter.

You're doing it again - you're equating 'late because it's not out and final by their hoped or planned estimate' - with failed. It's not failed, it's late. Failed is missing from a final game release. There has not been a final game release Comprende? Wait - I'll help since you brought up 'defintions'

Failed
1.(of an undertaking or a relationship) not achieving its end or not lasting; unsuccessful. "a failed coup attempt"
2.(of a mechanism) not functioning properly. "an aircraft with a failed engine"

Late
/leɪt/
adjective
1. doing something or taking place after the expected, proper, or usual time. "his late arrival"
Similar: behind time, behind schedule, not on time, unpunctual, tardy, running late, overdue, delayed.

adverb
1. after the expected, proper, or usual time. "she arrived late"
Similar: behind schedule, behind time

No-one, not even Chris will argue that the game isn't taking longer than expected and by definition (as you say) that means it is late by their previous estimates - I'll give you that. Failed, is completely different. We can discuss the reasons why it is late, but we can't discuss why it failed because it hasn't, they are still working on all of it. It's not a strawman, it's a plain fact.
"My argument is "why have they been so wrong, so consistently, about their ability to get it done in the timelines they themselves put forward" - and it's one you still haven't engaged with, because you keep attempting to change the subject. Why is that?"

There you go, we can discuss that. Thing is, I have engaged with it.
"It's a simplistic notion that just because they talk about something it will arrive tomorrow. There are such things as technical dependencies, unforeseen events and budgetary restrictions."

Too many wordy made all a bit confusing? Eyes go googly? OK I'll break it down:

Technical Dependencies - these are things you need to make things go. If you've never made those things that make things go before, you can only give an estimate about how long it will take to make them. Hence my talking about the difference between Game Design and Game Building. Sorry, promised to keep it simple. My bad.

Some games are built with the same things you built a game with before, so you if you know how long it took before and you make a game with the same tools, very same - you can make a good guess about how long the next game will take to make. Skyrim V and Starfield are very samey gamey, because they made them with same tools! Yay! Getting it now?

Game Design. This is a brand new game! Never made one like it before! It's made with shiny new tools you had to make yourself! First you had to find some clever boys and girls, tell them what you want to make, then they make the tools, they might not get it exactly right the first try but that's OK, and once they've made the tools you can use those to make YOUR GAME! Guessing how long it takes to make tools is hard, really really hard, because even clever girls and boys have to do a real lot of head-scratchy thinking about it. Especially when you need a lot of tools! Knowing which tools you need to make something you've never made before is really really hard. Boo hoo. Sad face.

You know what's even harder? Starting to make your game even while your friends are still making the tools! You don't know how long they will take to make the tools, you have to think about - what can I do while I'm waiting for Craigs tool! and Jonathans tool! and.. and.. Sarah's tool! Oh no!

Here's another of those confusing words. Unforeseen.
It means you didn't know it was gonna happen! Like when some of your friends who've been helping you are sick and away from the playhouse, or or.. they go on holidays! Have ickle babies! Aww!

Or they go away to go play with other friends. Sad face.

Oh No! Now how long will it take to make my game? It'll never be finished on time for my friends party! He'll be very upset!

Sometimes everybody gets sick and we ALL have to move out of the playhouse! Yikes!

We need more friends to help us make our game! but we can't find anymore friends right now, we've got lots of sweets and candies, but no-one wants to play!

Oh wait, we got some new friends but we haven't got enough space, we'll all have to move to a new playhouse, a bigger one! That'll be fun!
Except when he specifically told everyone that even if funding dried up tomorrow, they'd still be able to deliver the game they had sold. Or did you conveniently forget that fact? Here's the quote, in case you did:

"We keep a healthy cash reserve so that if funding stopped tomorrow we would still be able to deliver Star Citizen (not quite to the current level of ambition, but well above what was planned in Oct 2012)."

This just goes to show your lack of critical thinking. That post was from 2014! How many offices did they have? How many staff did they have? How many do they have now?

50 jellybeans divided by 10 playmates, we each get 5 jellybeans! Yay!

Oh no we got more friends, a lot more! Now we have 100 friends!

Only 50 jellybeans! We only get half a jellybean each! Very very sad face!

Oh wait.. that's nice Mummy and Daddy have been giving us more jellybeans all along.. Yay! Everybody still gets 5 jellybeans!

Don't you think they have to keep adding to that reserve, as well as increasing expenses? Where does that come from? Have you actually read their yearly financial statements?

When you grab a quote do you actually read it? The bit in the brackets - (not quite to the current level of ambition, but well above what was planned in Oct 2012). Hmm I wonder what 'not quite the current level of mambition means'? Does it mean 'dumbed down', maybe? Or maybe 'Some things missing?'

It wouldn't take much to go above what was planned in 2012 from the perspective of technical game design, THEY'VE ALREADY SURPASSED IT - as I said. It's not me assuming they haven't done any work on things they haven't shown, I know they have. But some won't be convinced because - "Unless I see it in the game neeeooowww it doesn't exist!" Huh!, I think maybe you're one of them. Fairly sure about it.
"What an inherently stupid idea, stop funding the project and it will get us the whole 100 star systems promised game sooner... and Squadron 42!"

"Well, considering that idea comes directly from Chris Roberts himself, you tell me!"

Are you suggesting Chris is telling everyone to stop contributing to the game? He's gone on social media and said - Don't give any more money! Anybody! No, you don't mean that, you probably had a memory tucked away about him saying - If someone thinks they contributed enough then don't contribute anymore, we're good. But there we go again, it's the same old talky-points arguments. It's only the deluded whales keeping the project afloat! It's not all those newcomers, can't be! Just can't be.

We're done. I can't take you seriously. You seem to have even less grasp of what this project is about, what it's purpose and history is than some who arrived last month.

Sorry, teacher says - you failed!

If there is no break between you and the RL, sure you can reconnect as a replacement DGS is spun up, but if there is a break you'll still see the 30K notification because it's a client side error. We'll see them a LOT less often, but they will still happen. Bad WiFi, bad internet - you know.

If a DGS goes down your game client will keep running as it's connected to the Replication Layer but nothing in the game will respond until you're reconnected to a DGS. The RL doesn't simulate the game world, it just keeps hold of the authority over your game client to keep it running.

Not exactly. Sorry to say.

30K's are a game client notification of game service authority disconnect. Yes, a DGS crash can cause a 30K, but there are other causes.

If there is a network disconnect anywhere between the Replication Layer and your game client for more than a specified period you'll still see a 30K notification.

But yeah, no more 'crash incoming!'

Struggling to understand what you mean here, are you using 'instance' in place of 'Shard'?

Speaking more broadly:

There will be multiple instances of the whole game universe called Shards. There will only be one version of a game location per shard, but each game location will exist on all shards. There won't be copies of game locations per Dedicated Game Server in a shard. Shard 1 will only have one Stanton system and one Pyro system. Shard 2 will have it's own Stanton and Pyro... and so on.

Each shard will have as many meshed servers as it requires per the player population in that shard. Dedicated Game Servers are only spun up for locations where the players are, there won't be empty DGS's spun up, many thousands of players per shard who can all interact via meshed DGS's on that shard. Obviously those parts of the game universe won't have anything happening in them if they aren't spun up on a DGS and that's why the backend simulation is running to make the whole game universe dynamically change over time even in places where there are no players.

As they progress toward Dynamic Server Meshing the number of shards can be reduced but real world signal travel time has some bearing on that. Dynamic Server Meshing is about a more cost efficient use of player servers which will become more population driven rather than game location driven, DSM reduces the need to spin up a game location on a Dedicated Game Server just because one player is present, rather than a location having a fixed game world boundary that boundary can expand or contract according to where the players are.

Taking the extreme example of 1 player in a shard:
If a player is in Stanton then there is a DGS spun up with the Stanton system it has static boundaries, it can only load the Stanton system. That is Static Server Meshing.

If the player wants to go to the Pyro system then another DGS has to be spun up that has Pyro on it so the player can move DGS to DGS to get to Pyro. The Stanton server is then spun down. You need to rent time on two DGS's.

With Dynamic Server Meshing the DGS holding Stanton can have it's boundaries dynamically extended to load Pyro onto the same server, the player goes to Pyro while on the same server. Stanton is then streamed out of that DGS using Server Object Container Streaming. You only need to rent time on one DGS with Dynamic Server Meshing for that player.

Quantum runs a virtual copy for each shard (some things will be copied across shards such as commodity prices etc) it's purpose is to simulate the places where players aren't. Quantum and the vNPC system are to put NPC's and the economy into each shard. Quantum and vNPC's won't be shard hopping at the granular level where players can encounter it directly.

So.. yes there will be thousands of players per shard once Static and Dynamic Server Meshing is in, as to whether there will ever be only one shard for all players that is dependent on solutions to real world signal travel time, so yes it's unlikely in the medium term, even with Dynamic Server Meshing it will remain regional shards for a good while yet. Dynamic Server Meshing is not an answer to signal travel time delay, it is the answer to making server meshing more cost efficient per player. If they can simulate a maximum of 1 million vNPC's on a server running the whole universe and it supplied all shards simultaneously with unique vNPC's then you'd have to divide the number of vNPC's by the number of running shards, it's easier to run 1 million vNPC's per shard since it just requires 1 running simulation server per shard. Players on one shard will not encounter vNPC's on another shard at all just like players on one shard can't encounter players on another shard. If there are 10 shards and 1 million vNPC's shared over all shards then 900,000 vNPC's are being simulated for players that they would never see on their shard.

UE doesn't come with persistence, so far Bethesda's Creation Engine and Starengine are the only major ones that support that feature
Creation Engine 2 doesn't come with any more Persistence than Skyrim V or any other game by Bethesda. Creation Engine, old or new, cannot make un-modded multiplayer games. The persistence comes from the game save stored locally on your hard drive, it is not shared persistence.

Creation Engine 2 uses cell technology just like other Bethesda games to put game content into an area. Imagine a honeycomb grid, the player walks on this grid. The honeycomb cell the player is in is populated by game content via RAM loading, the cells around the cell the player is in are loaded with lower LOD content and that lower LOD content doesn't get thread priority for physics they don't even rig the 3D meshes for characters at the lower LOD's only the top level LOD's are rigged for animation. You can see this in Skyrim V most notably with giants, windmills and waterfalls, they are static and un-animated until you are in the cell they occupy once the LOD's are swapped out. If Todd Howard knew that Creation Engine 2 had changed the way it loaded RAM he would be shouting it from the rooftops because he knows there is an army of modders out there who know the Creation Engine capabilities very well and they would be overjoyed to hear it.

RAM loading takes time so this process is prone to 'popping in' of game assets - this is why they don't have low level high speed over-ground traversal in Starfield, it's why you have an in-engine animated loading screen for flight to ground, once the single POV landing sequence is complete your ship is a static object just like a building or a dungeon. The space flight / space combat will (is seen to be) very basic compared to other games of the type. Starfield has fast travel just like other Bethesda games, it's just hidden behind the non-interactable loading animation.

This cell loading is also why they make single-player games because you can only top LOD load one cell the player is in, any cell another player is in will have less / lower LOD objects in it from the players point of view. The player thinks he is crouching in thick bush and can't be seen, meanwhile the other player sees no bushes around other players, only his own cells bushes. Star Citizen and Squadron 42 use Object Container Streaming for RAM loading, so they don't have this issue or limitations. StarEngine has the limitation that objects are less dense overall, but that is what Server Meshing is planned to fix.

UE5 looks nice but it has limitations, the sort of limitations that make it unusable for a Star Citizen type game. Nanite has a list of things it doesn't support, such as transparency / translucency (there is no light transport through any object rendered via Nanite) and there is no stereoscopic VR capability for Nanite rendered objects. It doesn't support complex UV's or 3D mesh rigging the way StarEngine does and you can only use one type of material preset - solid object.

The easiest way (in my view) to understand what Nanite is and how it works is to think of it as a simplifier and compression algorithm applied to a 3D object mesh, it's a down-detailed zip file of the 3D object. Once the Nanite algorithm is applied the 3D mesh is discarded from the point of view of the game build, you're only keeping the compressed simplified version of that object, only it's skin information. How each triangle on the skin is attached to the next triangle.

Nanite strips out a lot of the 3D mesh information, like bone attachment points, and only considers the positional relationship between triangles that make up the faces of that 3D mesh, it then applies a compression algorithm to that triangle relationship information to compress the information down to a smaller size for download and storage on a hard drive, and for loading into RAM.

This compressed file is searchable by the Nanite algorithm, the compressed file has a rigid structure to make it searchable. The Nanite renderer says to the file loaded on the hard drive, which triangles (parts of the skin) are in direct line of sight to the camera? Show me only those triangles by loading them into RAM / VRAM... ignore any triangles not in direct line of sight of the fixed camera position right now for this frame view... that's why they can't be deformed or be 'see through' because the algorithm has fixed relational data for each triangle and it doesn't account for any triangle not in view, they can only be scaled because the relationship information between each triangle can't change, it can only be calculated from the camera position data. This algorithm that uses the camera position data to plug into is the big selling point, the algorithm says if the camera is far away from the object then reduce the number of triangles and average them out, that's why any game that uses Nanite doesn't need multiple 3D meshes of the same object at different LOD's. It's also why you can't have two different views of the same triangles.

Nanite doesn't support any 3D object mesh that changes shape in engine, nothing with 3D mesh deformation - so no game characters / fauna or wavy flags, no deformable faces, complex hair stranding, clothes or bedsheets, no bendy bushes or trees, no glass objects - it only works for static non-animated solid objects. Nanite rendering is also restricted to 16 Million triangles on screen at any one time. Since a face, the thing texture is applied to is always 2 triangles at least that means 8 Million faces, it's great for close up narrow view of terrain and architecture, not so much for wide angle view open areas populated with 'life', you certainly can't use Nanite for things like waves on water. You might see those things in games made with UE5 but they won't have Nanite applied to them, those objects will use the standard rendering just like all modern game engines, including StarEngine, for threading and rendering.

TL:DR
Any game made with UE5 / Nanite will have to be made with standard 3D geometry for anything you want to see through or see light pass through, anything that moves and deforms via a character rig / bones or material preset and anything you want to see in stereoscopic VR. If someone does MOD Starfield they will have a big job making things persist for more than one player and they will need to have a heck-a-lot of RAM with a very fast access Hard Drive to load top level game objects into more than one cell both for multiplayer and single-player fast traversal over ground, if they can pull it off. How hard is all of that? Bethesda won't even try, they never have. Bethesda makes very good and engaging walking/running single player games with Creation Engine and Starfield is no different.

To say 'non-existent' suggests that it/they doesn't exist anywhere, but it does, we just can't see it.

The character rigs are extremely detailed, we've seen later work. I also got to see them during an office visit in 2016 and they were striking even then you could see each individual stitch, I'm sure they improved muchly since then.

I don't think the post(s) are meandering. Seems coherent to me, though I do recognise some of the talking points from certain echo-chambers that are predominantly negative historically.

Regarding:

Marketing Division - I agree they are out of touch with the community. They have been for many years in my opinion and I've been saying so for at least 7 years. Customer Service lacks direction, they are reactive, not pro-active in my view. It's also my view CIG don't seem to demonstrate the ability to extrapolate the ramifications of their player facing choices into the future, or 'read the crowd'.

Community Engagement - They have made mistakes... I doubt there is anyone, including them, who wouldn't say so. Having talked to Jared in person a little about this I can say that some have the wrong impression. They think that CIG staff aren't highly compartmentalised in the way they work, Jared assures me they are (he stated he has no idea above what the community knows about what is in Squadron 42 for example) and developers when they come on screen say they are not involved in, or aware of, other teams work where there is no cross-over.

Those who have the overall view (senior managers) have been speaking to us about that overall view less and less in the last 3 or 4 years, we have been locked into a 'patch watch' and 'tools watch' cycle and it has not allowed many newcomers to understand the whole aim of the project, it has shut down the dreamers in my opinion, those of us who started with nought but the dream speak a different language to those who haven't experienced it - most of whom wanted to be explorers, even if that meant exploring our imaginations.

When the director of Community Content wants to make a series of videos on a subject he isn't fully aware of the whole picture of current development, and plans change. I agree it doesn't look good when a part 2 is expected and a series they say we should expect gets only one episode - and even though I will be accused of white knighting here - when a group attempt something that has never been done before we might expect it not to wok out as we, or they, expected at the time they say it. Is it any wonder other game development studios don't do it this way?

Squadron 42 - I agree that Chris' decision to blanket 'spoiler' all Squadron 42 progress beyond barely decipherable progress reports to the average and the odd in game feature is not one I would agree with given the nature of this project and it's community, and I have made posts about this. However:

The OP makes assumptions and proceeds as though those assumptions are fact.

Some things in Squadron 42 may take time to adapt to multiplayer, how much time who knows, but many other things will not need to be adapted for multiplayer at all because they are made using the same tools and pipelines as the ones used for Star Citizen, it's the same game engine for both. You can't look at Squadron 42 as one big gooey mass, it is made of component parts and each should be assessed individually to make a determination as to whether they would need any adaptation, and how much. It renders an argument weak to generalise.

Another tacit assumption made by many is that Squadron 42 is like all other single-player FPS games, perhaps 6 - 10 hours gameplay in an 'on rails' environment you can't stray beyond - this is not so. You aren't going from mission to mission with maybe 20 or 30 lines of character dialogue between each mission where you are locked into a small space which is really a loading screen to do not much more than walk around and look at things until you are ready to click on the next mission task. It is not that type of game, time runs 'in real time' while you are playing the story parts, you'll do what you're supposed to do when you're supposed to do it... or else.

When you talk to the development team members in person the one aspect they keep emphasising is how huge / massive the game is, they aren't talking about game-space scale, they are talking about the sheer volume of gameplay content the player will engage in. The things you can and will be doing, the amount of choices you will be making. There is a whole backstory to your character you will play out which gives meaning to what you are doing for the rest of the games.

Even if you attempt a minimalist speed run it will take around 10 times longer to finish the game than the average AAA title... it is massive. The vertical slice shown took 1 hour and it is only a small section of that chapter and it was a minimal spoilers quick demo run-through, I know this for a fact, there were many other characters the player could have talked to and activities the player could (should) engage in. With one of the characters they show you meeting in the vertical slice it isn't the first time you meet them in that chapter, even though it looks like it is. That vertical slice speed-run was carefully set up because they would have revealed some key points of the plot of the first few chapters if they had shown the player doing all the things you could do. That chapter alone has more things for you to do than the average AAA FPS game.

When listening to those questioning how long it should take and how much it costs just ask yourself, compared to what? Which other game are they comparing this behemoth to and why do they think it is anywhere near comparable? If you just take the amount of game feature testing for ten average AAA games, you'll wonder how they did it all this fast and for so little. The word you will see being used to describe Squadron 42 Episode One most often will be 'Epic'.

Another assumption about Squadron 42 Episode 2 and 3 is that they would start from scratch again, common sense tells you this isn't so since the following episodes are a continuation of the player characters' story in the same game universe. They don't have to re-make ships, the flight model, uniforms, animations, the character creation pipeline, weapons, Render To Texture, DNA, in-game feature elements etc - indeed the only parts they have to make new for episodes 2 and 3 are character heads (using the existing pipelines), new locations and Mocap dialogue most of which wouldn't impact the PU hardly at all in terms of the manpower and resources needed.

Server Meshing - as others have pointed out before, the idea isn't new but it has not existed at this scale before. Coming up with an idea is the relatively easy part, making it fit into a live game of this scope is where the hard work is and since there is no precedent for it they have to fit these WIP pieces together as they go... and there is certainly no precedent for that. Server Meshing is not some standalone piece of work, it has to fit within a complex system of interacting parts like PES, the Replication Layer, the whole universe backend simulation that runs in parallel with the live game service alpha.

Since we have agreed that expressing an opinion is valid, it is my opinion that the OP doesn't seem to have a full picture of what Squadron 42 is or a complete overall view of what Star Citizen is planned to be. His conclusions about Episode Two and Three are erroneous and don't take account of work already done. You don't stop to 'pretty up' something while you are still deep in the bowels building it, which is why having a live alpha game release for a WIP game is so exceedingly rare.

The usual response to reminding those with a generally negative attitude that they keep discounting salient differences between this project and other game projects is to insist it's all fantasy, that it will never be finished because look at how long it is taking, that we have all been duped and anyone gainsaying their opinion is deluded and or acting out some version of Stockholm Syndrome. There is no discussion with that type of rationale, they keep insisting others look at the evidence but they won't reasonably consider the evidence presented to them. They don't seem to be aware of the limitations (and the ramifications of them) of other games and how CIG are blowing past those limitations. It is not unreasonable to point to feature development and say, this is new and never tried before certainly not on this scale. It is not unreasonable to ask someone to consider, perhaps this thing is way bigger than your imagination can comprehend, that problems are far harder to solve than you realise and that is it is more reasonable to assume because of this why it should take longer than you imagine it should take.

When CIG casually say they are going to do something, like building interiors in a massive open world MMO, those who have no idea how 'out there' such a thing is accept it just as casually as CIG present it, while those who might have some idea of how radical it is dismiss it as 'crazy', 'insane' and accuse CIG of wild scope creep... who cares, all that matters is... someone is going to try where others have historically insisted it is impossible!

if you don't know what the 'attachment problem' even is, how can you have a reasonably informed opinion on how and why CIG have chosen to solve it instead of the usual 'fake it to make it' approach found in all other games? If you don't care about those novel solutions and features, fine, there are many other games that leave those limitations in, there are plenty out there. If you don't care about pushing those bounds, if you're happy with those historic limitations then frankly this isn't the project for you and that is not a bad thing, enjoy what you enjoy, support what you want to support - just try to understand the aim of this project was to be different, and THIS IS the difference, time and the willingness to go back and rework until they/we get what we wanted is a part of the equation that makes it so different. If you need a publisher, if you need corporate imposed deadlines then go play those games that have them, have fun... come back later if you wish.

Consider:

There are posts telling CIG not to feature things too far out from inclusion in the game at CitizenCon. No long term goals featured that people have to wait long periods to see in the game.

There are posts complaining about the lack of current progress on certain features on ISC's.

These apparently conflicting requests sometimes come from the same people. Unless of course they just repeat information on ISC's, SCL's etc that they cover at CitizenCons.

They have to find content for both.. how do you square this circle?

People are interested in different aspects of game development, some like to see the process of asset creation, some like to see big enabling tech planning and execution, some like to see granular detail on feature development, some like to see deep dives on lore and world building... how to please everyone? The easiest way is to use the correct media for the type of information, some things fit better in monthly reports or Jump Points, web based Q&A's, some fit better on live streams, some are more suited to pre-recorded video shows... and some for live in-person presentations.

If a certain subject is your fascination then perhaps consider looking in the right place for it.

...and what position do you hold at CIG?

Perhaps a senior position at another game development company that does spaceflight combat even?

You see, there are a lot of posts about time estimates for required work from some sections of the community which when examined turn out to be using the POOMA method to calculate.

POOMA = Pulled out of my ass

This is the reason no one takes this kind of guff seriously.

You have no idea what is in the game apart from the revealed A list actors. What have you seen? A short vertical slice that took 1 hour to play through and didn't even take up all the possible options in that section of the game, it didn't even start at the very beginning of that chapter, and it ended long before the end of that chapter - that chapter alone has more events in it, and more things for the player to do, than some AAA games (Like COD Infinite Warfare for example)... and a trailer that tells you, you don't even start the game as a navy pilot.

Where are you in the trailer? Aboard a Javelin - why?. Does Captain McLaren sound like she's talking to a tourist? "I see you've applied to join the flight academy again". She knows you, knows your history. Of all the video we've been shown she and Old Man Colton are the only ones who don't refer to you by your rank. You're not there as a navy pilot, how are you going to become a navy pilot in time for your first posting aboard the Stanton? Why are you present to witness Admiral Bishop say "We will not lose this system" in a fight with the Vanduul, and then later in a different star system fighting mercenaries as a rookie pilot?

You have no idea how long it will take to complete the game. Do you even know that there is a game within the game that will take hours, it's where you do all your training? The average first person story driven triple A takes around 7 - 10 hours. Judging by what I've seen, an average player playing for 3 - 4 hours a day 4 - 5 days a week is going to take a couple of months to finish the game. If anyone is thinking to take the day off work to do a caffeine fueled red-eye playthrough, you won't even get through the first 2 chapters.

You have not much clue about the technical advancement that has gone into the game, even though we have a Roadmap and anyone could go out and find what the limitations of other games are compared to what CIG are doing... but why bother? You can just assume what you like and bang on about it. But then complain if people don't take the argument seriously.

I've been to 2 CitizenCons, BritizenCon 2016 and several BarCitizens, as well as one UK office visit - it is a place where you get to speak to the developers directly, how often does that happen with other games you play? Mostly about the information they have just given but also more detailed stuff, they can put it all into context. It's nice to be able to go into the game and be able to say, I met the guy who made that, he explained why they made it that way.

It's also a place where the team can speak to the players directly and that has an impact on their feeling about the project and it gives them ideas. It is as much of a motivational event for the team as it is for the community. Game developers don't very often get to meet those who play their games, almost certainly not while the game is being made, it changes their attitude to what they are doing now that they don't have to work in absolute secrecy all the time.

You find out things you don't find on video presentations, like how do they feel about working for CIG. They become real people, not just talking images on a screen.

Like trying to explain colour to someone blind from birth, you don't know what you don't know, when you attend these events, you see a little more, a little deeper. Asking questions online most feel ghosted, we're just a part of a crowd, when you ask in person you might not get the answer you want but at least you know they heard you. You can look them in the face, some of the attitudes and language we see directed at team members wouldn't happen if it was all face to face.

You listen to some who try to present an image of Chris and realise, he's just as much of a gamer big kid as the rest of us, he likes to see the costumes people make, the art they are inspired to make, and he talks about other games. He engages with people. When he says he's making the game he always dreamed about playing, that becomes clear when you meet him but each member of the team has their own personality and approach, some are outgoing and lively, some not as much. I've only ever met one team member I didn't like much, he left the company years ago. Generally people who meet Brian Chambers come away with a positive view of him and a respect for his years of experience, he talks to you as though you matter he takes the time to listen and explain things, you can see how he interacts with other members of the team, the same with Tony Zurovec, he is one smart cookie. Todd Papy has a sense of humour and is easy to talk to, just about anyone would be happy to have him as their boss. I've been to other conventions and such, at CIG events you don't get the impression they are there 'just to do a job'.

Producing games is an art form, which artist doesn't like to see others enjoying, engaging with and noticing the details of their labour?

The ship hype stuff doesn't get that much attention when you're actually there, and of course we get the collectibles and see the artistry and ingenuity of other members of the community. The events are full of 'personality's' both known and unknown, you get a bit of epeeing about ships they own and the size of their fleet. The talk isn't all about patch watching it's more about dreams for the future of the game, so that makes a nice change. You find our community (including CIG team members) is generally a tolerant, courteous, well informed, friendly (even generous) bunch nothing like what you see online. First and foremost, for most people who go it's a social thing they are just as keen to go to the after-party meet ups, CIG staff always attend them, you get to hear some gossip about personality's in the community, that sort of thing.

I you like formulaic repetitive teenage angst music, using whole verses of bordering irritatingly elongated vowels to fill time or express false sentiment, go right ahead. 3 words would have sufficed. He got NODs. He's seems to be pleased about it.

Who do I speak to about getting my time back and when does the urge to stop throwing something at the screen go away?

Todd Howard stood on a stage and announced Starfield in 2018 - 5 years ago. Did anyone think it would take another 5 years to arrive? No. The hype train doesn't usually start up it's engines until 18 - 12 months out.

CitizenCon is a mixture of both the informational presentations and the aspirational presentations. This community likes to know what is coming, what the longer term plans are and the majority accept the 'what' is more important than the 'when'. The average time from announcing a new feature or game location at CitizenCon to actually seeing it in game is about 2 years (I'm not talking about back end engineering here, we generally know that takes longer). Again, most know that.

The difference between Bethesda and CIG is that we get constant progress reports keeping those features at the forefront of peoples attention, so of course it seems longer. A watched pot and all that.

Whatever is presented at CitizenCon we know it won't change the overall development, those things would have happened, when they are going to happen, with or without a presentation at CitizenCon.

Those who just want to play a game might prefer the Bethesda approach to communication, those who are as much interested in the process of development as the final product prefer CIG's approach to communication - you pay your money you take your choice. If someone didn't know the nature of the project before they joined they weren't paying attention.

The whole point of this project was to aim for the best possible, not simply the best that can be done within a given timeframe and budget.

I don't see this as any type of argument, I don't follow the logic. Invent a different scenario based upon nothing, presume that scenario must be the case because we haven't heard anything recently to argue against the premise. Why would they even try to refute such a premise if they know they covered the subject, and they have no idea that someone might think up such a thing?

Why would they make such a huge change to their plans, the interview where Chris talked about it happened after all the main story elements were set in stone, ie after the 2015 mocap shoot. We all know they don't endlessly repeat information they've already given us, unless there is a change.

We know they expanded the original story of Squadron 42 both because Chris told us, and because the vertical slice mission is set in a star system that was a $4 million stretch goal - after the original Squadron 42 pitch on Kickstarter. Why would I assume they've taken stuff out while they've been busy adding more stuff?

How far do we go back? 1 year, 2 years? Should we doubt everything more than 2 years old if it's not in the game today, just to suit those who may have a generally negative view? Why not go the whole hog and just presume they've dropped Squadron 42 altogether, they haven't mentioned it in person for about 9 months. Plenty of time to change their minds.

How do we square such scepticism with the fact that Chris has told everyone that if they reach a certain part of Squadron 42 you get 'the badge' to own an F8C Lightning in the PU? Don't we assume that if that changed CIG might expect people to be disgruntled about it?

Struggling to see where such a notion might spring from: Those advertising posters in UEE Naval uniform in the alpha release of the game that say 'Service Guarantees Citizenship' might they not have been quietly taken out?

Absence of [recent] evidence is not evidence of absence. Conspiracy theories are just that, theories.

I recently learned that those who were noisily insisting for years that <a certain anticipated feature> had been dropped completely from the game were just plain wrong, and some of them saying it knew it was wrong even while they were insisting on it. Why do I know? Because it was them I got the evidence of it's continued development from. But hey, they could still have dropped it (again?) in the meantime, who knows? It's not a slam dunk.

Who should I trust? Some guy on the interwebz with a theory or Chris, and Erin who I also spoke to in person about what I mentioned above? I'll leave it to each to make up their own mind... only time will tell.

If the subject comes up I'll put my case to the best of my knowledge, let others make their case and the reader can decide.

This is my advice to anyone: If you get the opportunity go and ask them yourself if it matters to you more than the next ship you want to know about. They get pretty chatty in person and they seem to like it when someone doesn't ask the same questions for the 50th time that day. Pay attention to who you are talking to, the director of community content won't be able to tell whether or when the mech suit will make it into the game. You can find out a few things you thought must be a deep dark secret, turns out, they aren't they just never bothered to mention them publicly or they thought we already knew. Like, the Terra Nova system was going to be the first system in PU, and Terra Prime the first landing zone not Stanton, but they changed their minds when procedural planet tech became a reality, Stanton had more diversity to incrementally test the new tech - apparently. Courtesy of Jared... because I asked, what happened to all the work on Terra Prime?

It's been only 2 years since Tony Zurovec told everyone that virtual AI NPC's have a continuing history log attached to them, and that was the reason for having a running backend simulation of the game universe as well as the live game so that AI NPC's didn't just go into stasis when not spawned in on a DGS around players, why should players have any less in a game planned to have full persistence and character progression? What Chris, Erin and Tony have said consistently makes sense to me taking the aims of the project as a whole, what others might think makes less so.

You may have served your time for a crime, but that crime remains on your history log. Anytime you interact with the system, ATC for example, it is recorded on your history log. If you are scanned by security forces it goes on your history log. NPC's and players can access certain parts of history logs depending on the level of access they have, this isn't just a faction rating. Bounty hunters and the Advocacy can track you via your history log. Anyone in the game can decide if they don't like what they see on your history log they can deny you access to places and services. They just don't want your type around here.

When you play Squadron 42 you have a military history log, parts of that history go to your player log in the PU after you retire your character to the PU. When you undertake Advocacy missions currently in the PU you may notice Dully stipulates those with the requisite experience, of course right now it is assumed everyone has that experience, but once Squadron 42 comes out and the full reputation system goes into the PU, it will be limited to those with the relevant experience.

Things on your history log will determine what missions you can take, places you can go and even what equipment you will be allowed to legally own and use in UEE controlled areas. If you don't at least start Squadron 42 with a character you enter the PU as a civilian not a citizen. That will affect things you can do in the game. There are other ways to get citizenship but they are not easy, if you have a history of criminality on your history log it will be even harder or near impossible to get citizenship. There is no other other way to get ex-military status without starting Squadron 42. There are factions, like the Advocacy, where having a military history will be a benefit, there are factions (even if you've never interacted with them) who will be very suspicious of your military history, they may even attack you on sight because of it.

The UEE can revoke citizenship, for criminal history for example. When you leave the Klescher Rehab facility notice he (the guy on the tannoy system) calls you civilian, not citizen. There will be factions in the game who may not be criminal, but they just don't like the UEE, it is a militaristic empire run by an elite class (only Citizens can vote in UEE elections or stand for office, UEE citizens pay less tax to the UEE), and they see anyone wearing the uniform of the UEE as the jackboot of the UEE, they remember Anthony Tanaka.

It did add new things to do for those with the imagination to figure them out.

It did change the way we play, if you did a bunker mission before PES, if you went away and came back all the loot was gone, now it isn't. If you shot down a ship it de-spawned and you got nothing, now you can go loot it, and salvage it, whenever you're ready.

You don't think salvage was a significant add to game play this year? I think many might disagree with you. "..nobody is allowed to make money in the PU without combat being involved.", that's only for the salvage missions or those who want to engage in PvP, you can salvage ships anytime you find them, no-one needs to know you're there.

It does fit the sandbox genre, however where it goes beyond the sandbox MMO genre is the plan for the living breathing universe populated with active AI. As is usual for CIG they don't want to go with the standard form of AI and a faked background economy and lore they want to create a whole new type of AI and a universe that is self-sustaining and continually changing. Tony Zurovec explained it very well in his presentation, it's too expensive to keep tens of thousands of active goal orientated AI in live server memory and if they aren't in memory then they can't do anything - that is one of those hard facts of life you just can't ignore, data written on a hard drive doesn't change.

You can't manually script tens of thousands of NPC's unless they are all doing easily repeatable predictable behaviours - this would be the standard approach. How many games have free roam NPC's using their own vehicles and using public transport? Working toward their own goals? The current NPC's are running on legacy CryEngine logic via Subsumption, that's why they are static in a location, it's the same type of scripted NPC logic you find in all other games. Ironic isn't it? They want Star Citizen to be made like other games, yet the features of those games technology that remain in Star Citizen are their biggest source of complaint.

Sir Isaac Newton said "If I have seen further it is because I have stood on the shoulders of giants", while he was sarcastically mocking a rival scientist who was short in stature, it's still a truism, very little innovation comes all at once, it is a step by step process and hardly anyone could envision the changes Newton's work would have on the world, until it did. CIG are taking the step by step process.

Innovation takes time, frustrating, annoying and at times even boring though it may be it's the innovation that people will notice and remember. We have been through the content drought doldrums before while they work on underlying tech, we have heard people say they would never achieve what they plan, they still say it about things that are actually in the game - but they did achieve those things.

There's a reason other game studios don't do this type of stuff, venture capitalists, publishers and investors are even more susceptible to frustration, impatience and boredom than players.

We paid for, and signed up for, a different approach to game making, this is it, and there's no one else trying it at this scope and scale.

Those who use words like 'nothing', 'never', impossible' are only telling you the limit of their imagination. They aren't even being accurate about the current state of progress in many cases. They struggle to understand the difference between a locally stored game save on their hard drive giving the impression of persistence for a single player game and a massive cloud based game save of all the events in a whole game universe, and all the players in it.

They say they have the right to criticise and complain, which they do, but if they can't be accurate in their assessment of progress or understand why it has to be this way how much validity should we give their assessment of progress? Read through the comments on this thread, some are clearly not up to speed either with the aims of the project or even the current progress of it. They certainly don't seem to understand the limitations of the games they keep touting as better examples.

None of them have produced anything that benefits a single player, let alone advanced the player experience, and with such a negative attitude it's very unlikely they ever will. It's up to the individual who they choose to give their ear to - the builders building your house, or the guy at the gate telling them how to build a house when he hasn't seen the plans and has never so much as built a garden shed in his life.

If it frustrates some, if they can't wrap their head around why it has to be this way then surely it's best to just go play other games and come back periodically to see progress. Take some time to learn about the limitations of other games so that when they do see that progress they can understand the significance of it. Some just want 'a' game, but some of us wanted more... judging by the success of the project I'd say those who wanted more seem to be in the driving seat, if someone doesn't like where it's going, or it's not going fast enough for them they can get off the bus and walk around for a while, they're more than welcome to come back further down the line because unlike other games your ticket is a lifetime ticket to ride even if they upgrade the service.

Authority over all in game entities comes from the Replication Layer, they are working on that first. The Replication Layer was planned and designed exactly for the purpose of information sharing across DGS's and the Persistence Layer, as well as all other back end services.

The idea that you wouldn't hear any sound in space is erroneous, it's akin to hearing 'There's no gravity in space' of course there is, if there weren't why would moons go around planets and planets go around a star?

Why you would hear sound:

1. There's atmosphere in your ship, unless you remove it. There is atmosphere inside your helmet. Your ears are never directly next to the vacuum of space, unless you're dead in which case you wouldn't hear anything anyway.

2. When an explosion happens in space the explosive material expands as a gas and debris, inside the expanding gas shockwave is an 'atmosphere' which is reducing in density over time, it's the gasified molecules that the explosive was made of. Those expanding gas particles can/will impact the hull of a ship which causes vibration, that vibration is then passed to air in the ship and thus to your ears. In atmosphere the shockwave (sound wave) travels faster than the gas particles because being bigger those particles impact molecules in the air and lose momentum,, that momentum passes to the air molecules but in space the shockwave travels with the leading edge of the particles because those gas molecules aren't impacting anything. The shockwave will still impact any solid object and impart momentum to it, the amount depending on the density of particles inside the gas bubble and the cross-sectional area of the ship which is in a direct line of sight to those high velocity particles.

3. Solid objects, including high velocity engine trail particles, impacting the hull of a ship or helmet of a player will cause soundwaves inside the ship or the helmet because each action has an equal and opposite reaction. The sound you hear is the collision of the electrons of the object and impactor.

That is not to say this is exactly how it works in Star Citizen, because it is a game real world physics is simulated, but the idea that you wouldn't hear sound in space with explosions nearby, in the wash of an engine or with projectiles hitting things is not true while in a ship or in a helmet. You wouldn't hear the sound of objects / particles hitting anything else if separated by a vacuum, but you would hear them hitting anything you're inside of. What is unrealistic is having the sound travel at the same speed as the light, there should be a delay between seeing the explosion and hearing it, depending on how far away it is and the further away the more the sound should be muffled / lowered in frequency and volume.

I guess you missed the CIG communications regarding building interiors and underground infrastructure.

Also, they aren't waiting on Server Meshing to add Pyro.

I think it's referring to the holographic control consoles. We've seen still images of an example of them. iirc more related to engineering and systems management gameplay.

Heh heh.. got some cream? This burn is stinging mightily.

You'll be the guy to ask, Stuart must be asleep. What are we going to talk to our therapists about this coming Monday week? 21st.

I've checked all the national days CIG might be supporting, not much going on. Does anyone feel strongly about: National potato day, national mosquito day - a bit of a prickly subject. National Pecan pie day.. National soft ice cream day?

I'm sure we'll think of something.

Yep, the usual crowd in for their weekly echo-chamber shenannigins..

On a completely unrelated note...

Hey Stuart! How's Elite Dangerous coming along? Excited for the future? Haven't seen you in a long while, over here at least.

Oh...! the drama was just too irresistible and dragged you away from your intense gameplay and all those hot new feature discussions! eh?

Quick question, since you're hanging around with us for a bit - have they managed to get all two and half thousand of you lot onto one server yet? Do you find all those FDev community meet ups a bit samey like we do? Are all the old boys gonna be losing you to Starfield? Just think, an exciting new space game AND the opportunity for y'all to keep popping in and telling us how it should be done! Oh joy! Looking forward to it! Don't be a stranger.

Which magazine are we looking out for? C'mon spill the beanz - Kotaku again? Please... tell me it's not...Forbes!.. I couldn't stand the excitement! You'll get old Montoya really going with that!

Er.. just in case you hadn't noticed since you been away for a while an'all... it's ALL still here, going strong. How do they just keep on surviving all these dramas? You all work so hard!

Darn it!

No seriously.. welcome back to the land of the living, good to see ya old mate. For a while there I thought you might have given it all up!

[edit] In my excitement to see old friends I forgot to post on topic. I'm a Space Marshal, not currently subscribing, couldn't care less about PTU access waves. Having fun stuffing popcorn and watching others wet their knickers about it all, a little lite relief from the more serious stuff never hurt anyone.

They had one private investor in 2018 (a couple of years before they started regularly hitting the $100+ Million per year mark) who bought a minority 10% non-voting rights position for $46 Million, with an option to buy more shares (due to the company increasing in value), which strangely enough they took up... I wonder why if they were so anxious? $46 Million and no due diligence? Just as an aside to keep things in perspective, this same family business donated $107 million to South Africa's 'fight COVID' campaign in 2020, do they sound desperate for a few mil?

Who is this mysterious investor? It's the Calder family, father Clive and son Keith Calder (Snoot Entertainment) net worth $5.5 Billion. Made their fortune with record label companies and media distribution. You might know a few of their artists on the Jive record label: Britney Spears, Backstreet Boys, NSYNC to name a few. They specialise in marketing and distribution, indeed Sandi Gardner said the money was specifically ear-marked for the Squadron 42 marketing campaign to come. (Some of us remember Chris saying that no pre-release backer funds would be spent on marketing.) A quote echoed in the Forbes magazine article about the investment.

'Most' suggests multiple, there's only one and I don't see Forbes writing any articles about how the Calders feel about CIG buying into Turbulent and announcing it this year, do you? Or setting up bigger offices in the UK and Germany last year, and a new expanded office in Montreal before that. You can see how CIG are r.e.a.l.l.y struggling eh? If you actually bothered to look at CIG's financials you'd know they've already been paid a dividend on that investment, a tiny percentage of CIG's 2021 earnings. A sum significantly less than CIG's increased earnings for 2022 over 2021 (Around $26 Million increase). I wonder who's been helping them with all the marketing expertise?

Further to your point about trust.

When you catch someone in a lie, and you know they are pushing that lie frequently to try to make another party look bad, it's not hard to see who to trust.

When they keep saying to their hangers-on... Go ask about <this feature> and why CIG just dropped it after all that work, pushing it on every platform they have and even making it into a running joke at the other party's expense guaranteed to get upvotes every time it's mentioned, and you know for a fact that they know that isn't the case. Every 5 minutes we get someone primed to come and ask about it or hammer with ridicule anyone who says it's going to be in the game, or they want to see it in the game, it's a constant talking point in the circles they run, yet they know exactly what happened to it.

There isn't a better definition of FUD than deliberately misleading people, encouraging them to labour under a mis-apprehension for years when you've been holding onto good evidence to say the contrary. A simple line of text from the right person who frequents those circles would correct that mis-apprehension.

Here's the thing. We are limited in what we can talk about on Spectrum. Those who want to spread FUD use that fact to mislead. Those who are mislead think they are doing 'the good work' they've been charged and 'ginned up' to do.

Those who are responsible for spreading the FUD absolutely KNOW very well that the impression they are trying to give is not true because they have had access to sources of information for years that we can't talk about. I KNOW because I have seen some of those sources, I got them from them.

Did they feature that information on their Youtube channel or Discord dedicated to giving out information to everyone - no they didn't - I wonder why?

When they pass on information to Youtubers willing to spread unauthorised information do they include it all? No they don't. I wonder why?

Do they use the lack of moderation on a weekend or Reddit to give out the information that disproves their FUD the way they use it to spread their FUD? No they don't. I wonder why.

If you don't know what I'm talking about I suggest you go back to those whispering into your ear and ask them, why do you curate what information you know, have known, for years? Why don't you just give it all and let everyone decide?

You've more chance to find out that way than noise posting on Spectrum... but don't bet on it.

This is what I now KNOW - Squadron 42 E1 is going to be much better than I was expecting it to be. So... thanks.

This old chestnut again... sigh.. it is not two games, it is one game universe. Squadron 42 takes place in the same game universe, all the places, factions and assets come to the PU... even some of the characters may come to the PU. They are cross-connected. You play the same character in both if you choose to retire your character to the PU and there will be rewards and missions that go with having played Squadron 42. Things you gain in Squadron 42 transfer with you to the PU. It will be the same with the next episodes of Squadron 42 to follow, indeed any story they decide to tell in that game universe.

Why don't they have multiple strategies? The do, but ultimately they have to decide on one and focus on it, but be agile enough to re-plan - which they are. The Replication Layer is being separated from the DGS functions to facilitate moving forward with the plans for Pyro (and other star systems) while they work on Server Meshing. We have a released playable alpha even without Server Meshing.

These ideas don't come out of the blue, they look at known technology and think about what would be best for the game in the long term, something other game development companies don't have the luxury of. They inherited most of the R&D team from CryTek and a lot of the innovation is due to their continued work. Thy have also recruited very experienced people from Ubisoft, Bethesda and Sony Entertainment Division. The change from iCache came about because they looked at wider uses of customer databases in the computer technology industry. CIG can do this sort of wider-looking innovation because they are not locked into using a particular feature-locked engine which had to be stipulated at the start to be able to raise investor capital.

We will get building interiors and underground areas at a level of realism you don't find in games of this type because CIG don't lay off developers, and because there are no investors to say that we can't have them. Rockstar have taken hundreds of billions of dollars in sales of the GTA franchise and it's taken this long to get vehicle interiors fully modelled.

There are fall-backs if something doesn't work out. Chris could release a better version of a Starfield-type game with just the updated CryEngine they have now. The innovation doesn't slow development as much as people think, it is ongoing while they build the game - which is huge by the way. When you know that a standard game developer lays off teams once their part of a game is done in cost-cutting exercises you realise why Star Citizen is different, they don't do that they allow existing teams to look at innovation while the other teams continue their work, this allows feed-back between teams that otherwise wouldn't happen allowing continual improvement.

Yes, it's a different way of doing it, but we all wanted a different game experience, not just Chris Roberts. That's the whole point of this project and why it was directly funded by the players, not investors waiting for a return of profits that leech away funding for innovation.

You're not buying a game, you're buying the right to create unique characters who live their lives in this whole game universe, the clock starts ticking on this game universe when Squadron 42 Episode One is released and it never stops until the game universe is abandoned, and that won't be for many many years. It will be continually added to and improved, even better you don't have to keep paying for those improvements the way you do with other game releases.

Partially true but what you're alluding to... not necessarily.

Squadron 42 E2 and E3 will re-use a good deal of the assets from E1. The engine and tools won't need to be remade, there won't need to be re-modelling of existing main actors, many ships / vehicles have already been made and work flows have been refined to name but a few. Most of the new teams are allocated work for the PU and it's clear they are continuing to recruit.

I personally don't think that it is coincidence many new hires are coming from companies who have game products nearing completion, Bethesda for example. The advantage that CIG has over some companies is that they don't lay off teams when a game project goes through it's various phases because there is years worth of work still to come. In my estimation this would make CIG more attractive as a proposition to prospective recruits. I've heard this said by team members in person. They see more opportunity for advancement with CIG and that is a direct result of CIG having longer term plans.

This is not at all true. Jared has spoken of this many times and even in the last SCL.

Not only are they hiring teams for PU work, they are refining the tools and specifically designing tools to be easier to use for non-specialist game builders reducing the need for highly trained systems designers. As tools are finalised more and more team members will become proficient at using those tools.

Core tech pillars won't have to be remade and once completed existing assets made after them won't need any form of rework to work with those features, we've seen this with the ship pipeline ships and vehicles are being produced in a more finished state. The time they have taken to make those tools will shorten development time for future assets. They haven't just made tools for current usage those tools are designed for future planned assets as well, they have told us many times that pipelines are more streamlined and assets are being produced at a faster and faster pace. The amount of R&D required will gradually reduce.

Also we should not forget that work done on any version of Squadron 42 feeds into the PU. Those who insist that Squadron 42 assets will need years of work to come to the PU are frankly uninformed and most probably just deliberately spreading FUD. A great many assets that we don't know about and haven't seen are just waiting for core tech to be ready.

It's been a long time since I bothered shooting at anyone in the game, it's not because I'm a pacifist, it's because while they're changing things around I prefer to concentrate on skills for things they don't change like escape and evasion. I realise that won't help them testing but frankly I'd rather leave that to others since I'm 61 and now reflexes and eyesight aren't what they used to be. I also don't particularly like the message that some put out that you're automatically locked into fighting just because someone attacks you, it isn't true and we shouldn't give people the impression that it is. I played Ace Combat for hundreds of hours, but when they brought out Skies Unknown with it's arcadey 'mash buttons to enter dogfight mode' it killed it for me because it forced a particular type of play and tactics.

Having said that thinking about the actual game and it's differences between WWII style dogfighting a couple of things occur to me:

Combat is in space and gravity's / atmospheres that are different to Earth.

We have shields of varying abilities.

We 'should' have computers with advanced capabilities.

We have 6 degrees of freedom flight.

We have in-lore manufacturers of microtechnology.

My instinct is to do what @hcvertigo alludes to and view those making instructional videos and argument videos for changes referring to real world dogfighting, with dumbfire weapons, with scepticism.

One of the reasons for Congressional hearings on UAP's is given as UAP appear to have 6 degrees of freedom in atmosphere flight capabilites at acceleration rates which appear to defy / negate G forces. So frankly taking conventional aerial dogfighting and trying to extrapolate from that doesn't even work in the present day, and their military experts know that well enough to be worried about it.

In the game how would I do it?

I'd try to be realistic and just accept the facts. I'd make weapons and weapon classes that seek to negate some of those capabilities. I'd have area weapons that can both get into the targets probable path (flak) and do area damage to shields / armour. With the ship platforms we have in the game I see no reason why we can't have flak type weapons, targetted area weapons, on medium ships and heavy fighters / bombers with intelligent ammunition. This 'all projectiles are dumbfire' is anachronistic. I should be able to aim in the general direction of a target and let the ammunition guide itself to the target once in range, ballistics with short duration self guiding directional capability, lower fire rate and reduced damage compared to similar sized dumbfire projectiles. No-one needs a lead or lag pip on an anti-tank Javelin, you only need to specify the target selection. I'm fairly sure that microtechnology has improved by the 29th century to be able to allow that.

Directed energy weapons and dumbfire ballistics should be for precision strikes once you have sufficiently reduced your enemy's capability to resist attack and you can get in close enough to smell it's exhaust fumes. The aim is not to destroy but to remove their ability to fight back. In that case each weapon has a use case. If someone can fit all the same weapon on a ship and still come out victorious against a variety of targets the majority of the time, this in my view is neither realistic nor balanced. The weapon designers, defensive capability designers would have to be pretty unimaginative in the future if that were the case.

A good pilot should know when and where to use the capabilities of what they have chosen to load out with. Fighters as first strike works great if your opponents have little to no shields and thin metal coatings over sensitive areas and limited maneuvering capabilities, but if they don't have those limitations then the battle order should be reconsidered even in small scale, small ship encounters. Land forces know, you pound the enemy from range and only once you have reduced their fighting capability do you send in the troops for more precision. This is in my estimation why they have gotten themselves locked into this 'keep them close' even when the combatants have all teeth and claws intact rather unrealistic situation that they don't impose on capital to capital ship and land forces offensive behaviour. It's not 29th century dogfighting in space, it's 2nd century pointy blade fighting.

The play experience shouldn't be about fancy footwork, twitch and yank with all guns blazing it should be about intelligent platform and weapon selection and use of the tools you have at hand. In which case set your visual guides to suggest that. I wouldn't have lead and lag pips at all, I'd have the target reticle on what you choose to aim for and have a lock on indicator for dumbfire projectiles to tell you when the optimal time to fire is, then you use your ships capability and flight skills to get into the best position to give you the optimal position to fire with the weapon you selected to do the job. If you're using gimballed weapons put a converging indicator on helmet screen to show where your shots will go when you pull the trigger based upon what your ship is currently doing rather than trying to predict what the enemy is doing or going to do, leave that to the player. It is then purely skill based.

Defensive or counter-offensive weapons should equally be about selecting the right tool for the job at the right time. I find it very odd that fighting in space with 6DoF flight should entail firing counter-offensive always directly to the rear, even modern aircraft don't do that. I should be able to fire counter-offensives ahead of me, or in any direction, and have to learn to time it so that I don't fly into them. There's no air resistance in space and variable resistance depending on atmospheric density, the ships velocity should add to the velocity of the projectiles. I should be able to do what any octopus and squid has learned to do, put up a temporary screen so that it becomes a game of attrition and cat and mouse.

So you think CIG should survey every game package holder and have everyone fill out a form at point of sale for their health records and factor them into their game design plans? People die every day, sad, but a fact of life. The same could be said of any service offered to a customer. Build you a house you say, OK we'd better just knock a few bits of plywood together, you don't look well.

It's not a cogent argument to base a project on, there's nothing they can reasonably do about it. They're in the same boat, Chris isn't a young buck either.

Chris is doing the coding on this himself. He's writing code that allows each item to react individually rather than hit boxes. The hit registration will, if he's successful, be the surface of whatever item is struck.

Ha ha funny. I guess that's why all the successful politicians, media stars and trillionaires with their own close protection teams are so universally 'disrespected'. Or that a draft usually has exemptions for 'essential professions'. Oppenheimer never saw blood dripping from the pointy end of a Japanese bayonet, and yet they make movies about him. Haven't you noticed it's generally the young and lower in status and education level that tend to go off to war?

Hmm.. that old argument. What's that old saying? Something about the rubber meeting the road, or battle plans surviving contact?

Star Citizen was never pitched as having full planets to roam around prior to 2015, and no fly to ground loading screens in fact Chris repeatedly said it wouldn't happen - yet here we are. Do we pick the changes we like and call 'pwommisezzz' on the one's we don't like? Is that it?

The overall aim of the game always was about your character and your life in the verse, that you choose to live, with as much realism as they can put in.. you go to the gym, you get buff. I'm sure, because it's Chris, he'll put some limitations to stop mindless grinding, like no extra for crouching when there's no need to crouch. But yeah, there's exercise equipment in the game. I wonder if there'll be an obstacle course to run when you join the military? I hope so!

Those who take their Squadron 42 character into the PU are already going to have a very different experience of the verse than those who don't.

There'll be other choices for those who want to make them. I'm not going to be engaging in Roger Ramjet shenanigans much, I intend to be the sneaky-beaky James Bond / Ethan Hunt type who just happens to be a trillionaire hiring those with skillsets I don't particularly care to develop. Some want to be the head of their organisation, or some want to be an investigative journalist. This isn't like other games, there aren't any archaeologists in Tarkov, there aren't any Murray Cup Racing champions. Lewis Hamilton says he regularly pulls 8 or 9 G's in corners and he can do it because he has trained himself to do it because I suppose it's important to him. Me, I can get dizzy getting out of chair too fast but if you need medical attention I can guarantee you'd rather see me huffing and puffing round the corner than Lewis Hamilton.

Having no improvement even though you may have done certain actions over and over for many years doesn't reflect reality, and no matter how much you improve your personal skill, if the character performs the same under the same conditions whether you spent time improving a skill or not isn't realistic, otherwise why would we have training for anything, motor skills count just as much as experience.

The day they get easily affordable full haptic suits and 6DoF simulators for your gaming den they can make a game with no simulated physical skills improvement.

We know why. Those early destructible objects used damage states, sprites and decals which are laborious to create per item at scale. They switched to developing Maelstrom, which will also feature deformation and penetration not just destruction. As usual for CIG they tried the standard industry method, didn't like the limitations and so decided to create a whole new system.

What would be the point of laboriously creating damage states for thousands of in-game items when they know they are changing the whole damage system?

Physics are run on the servers CPU and those items in the video presentation don't just break they react to force and for the majority of the time since that demo physics was thread locked. We know they've worked on parallelization in the last few years.

Right now the servers are at max capacity in the PU... so you guessed it... what are we waiting for?

You have to pick your battles and optimise for your future intentions. They test things not according to just when they've done work on something but also when it's appropriate to test it - and in which environment.

Many talk about Star Citizen as though it was a released game with deficiencies and issues and the current state is the final intent - including you far too often. It isn't, and we know it isn't. Anyone who doesn't realise that just isn't keeping up.

Maelstrom, try to remember that word, it uses UV's to give every substance and material real world material properties - including heat damage.

This angst over iCache is misplaced. They wanted a system that made a hard disk stored state of entities in the game at regular intervals for Persistence. They made a first version, found that it didn't perform at scale as they hoped so they looked around for other solutions and found a better one, in another area of computer science, and adapted it. This is nothing new, it happens all the time in game development and indeed we only get to see it mentioned at all because CIG communicates details like this. They aren't going to rush to a camera every time they review something they plan for the game and we shouldn't expect them to. It's only assumed by those who hold a certain attitude that it somehow delayed the games' production - there is no evidence for that. All we need to know is whether the original intent for that system is still in place or not - It is... and it's in the game and working. If they hadn't changed the name and told us about it, you wouldn't have even noticed.

Extrapolating from this misplaced, and frankly uninformed, iCache dramallama to 'Are they still working on Quantum, Quasar and virtual AI population' - assuming because they don't talk about it every few minutes it must be abandoned, isn't realistic, we know Chris' overall aim for the game is to have a dynamic population and economy so no matter what they will try to continue making that happen. The 'how' we leave to them because they are the experts we expect to eventually deliver those capabilities... and frankly since there's no other game developer out there even coming close to promising such features, where you gonna go?

First - The role that iCache was to fulfill was never abandoned. It's upgraded successor that is fulfilling that role is in the game now.

Second - The current game doesn't have all the necessary features to make (much) implementation of Quantum worthwhile (they have input limited features of it into the current build for certain commodity prices and availability), ergo it wouldn't help testing at scale. PES is still being 'bedded in' and it is the focus of current testing. What would be the point of adding more to the backend network traffic that's just going to complicate seeing the remaining issues with PES?

When you see post after post: Fix the game! but where's this? Fix the game! but.. Add more of that of that stuff you promised to it! someone betrays the fact that they don't understand the process of feature development and testing in games in general, let alone in this hugely ambitious project. When a developer is doing R&D, especially while producing a live game environment, no-one with any real grasp of the subject should expect they will get every feature perfect on the very first try at that new, never been done before feature, it's not a realistic expectation.

I know people don't like to hear it but what we have IS an alpha test build and a huge amount of the features have never be done, or done this way as a whole before. You'll get them saying.. 'It's been done before in this game or that game!..' but never in this type of game or in combination. CIG are solving problems that most game developers of this type of game insisted for decades couldn't be solved. There are plenty of other features in development that are not appropriate for the current Alpha build testing, the DNA system for example, we don't panic about those.

This is buzzword FUD-spreading in my view, whether the OP knows it or not he's just soaking up bad information and repeating it because the emotion FUD-spreaders fuel and rely on is impatience, we all feel it at times, about many things.

iCache! Quantum! SataBall! Sandworm! - why aren't the FUD spreaders asking about the Spectrum? It will have just as much impact on the players' game experience, certainly more than any sandworm found in the Leir system or a SataBall game that takes place in star systems not currently in the Alpha. Why not ask about the PU Murray Cup racing tournament, we've been waiting for that since the project started and aside from an Arena Commander update we know absolutely nothing about that? - because it's not part of their buzzword lexicon.

There is absolutely no reason, and no evidence, to assume that Tony Zurovec's team has ceased work on anything they have previously shown - none. He's been working on it for years and they have talked about the improvements they have made over the time it has been developed.

When they show a ship being made do we say.. Oh that's hardly revolutionary! No, because we know that it's just them saying that thing we were going to make for you to use - here it is. it's just another in game feature ticked off the list to complete.

Player base building tools was something they said we would get eventually... and here they are showing us what they've made for us to use. It's as as simple as that. It isn't the new tool for them, it's the tool they said was going to be for us, they haven't finished the in game player useable UI yet (you heard him say 'Building Blocks' - that's the thing that makes in game UI's and HUD's) but we can see the functionality.

The fact that the asset library they have used for these UGF's was not being fully used is bye-the-bye and there will be more variety coming is nice to know.

They're adding player made bases functionality to the game... that's 'new' to us.

[edit] - Wait.. did some people think that simple asset placement tool was something the game designers have been waiting for to be able to make the game? That's hilarious!

As TMA-1 says, when you tie this into the functionality of the tractor beam and component placement whatever is in the library of assets that comes with the Rastar tool is up to you to use, he only showed is a UGF facility set of assets, there's a lot more it was a very long drop down list and he was only showing one category on that list. I know because I've visited their office back in 2016 and seen them using their version of the precedent for Rastar that they have multiple categories and sub-categories for their placeable asset library, far more than comes with the Skyrim Creation Kit for example, and that was back in 2016.

If you have your own landing pad/cargo elevator/storage area assets to place this will allow something they have talked about for years - but infrequently - commodity trading. Buy when the market price is low, hold onto to it in storage, sell when the market price is high. Farming, including livestock and live animal transport is coming to the game. How do you know hen the market is favourable and where? Well that's coming.

In the past they have also talked about how players will have their own mechanics (NPC's), upgrade and repair facilities.

There are other things coming to the game that they used to talk about years ago - player org meeting places and the Spectrum for example.

The Spectrum is the games in lore online communication platform (basically an internet) and source of information for players, it will have news shows and entertainment shows etc. If you check in the lore sections you'll see the names of some of those shows such as Showdown and Empire Report, they aren't just written blurb, they will be in the game, it's partly why they have worked on a tool to automate spoken speech to facial animation (just like FOIP) for NPC's, when you couple that with Render To Texture communications you can have 'live' shows generated from written scripts using a text to speech API which generates sound recordings without the need for voice actors. Something I've never seen in any other game was talked about in the directors commentary for the Squadron 42 vertical slice, they can have a 'live' simulation, fully rendered, of a location running even when no players are present in that location and stream it to any communication platform using Render To Texture. When you see the hologram call to the Stanton briefing room, listen to what Chris is saying in the directors commentary, that isn't just a pre-canned recording. Chris tells us, if the player goes to the location where that NPC is calling from they could photobomb that call.

Players and NPC's will be able to upload and live stream to the Spectrum. It's what the Reliant MAKO News Van is for, it is even supposed to have it's own editing suite so it's likely we'll get a ground based editing suite too. We've seen them use the in game editing suite in the last Jax McCleary adventures series.

When the Genesis Starliner was concepted it came with a whole set of brochures and lore, you'll be serving food and drinks to the passengers, but also pre-recorded entertainment. You'll have to buy those entertainment video series, and the NPC passengers will react to your service, including the entertainment. That same content will be available to players to view in their homes and bases, as well as aboard ship. As crazy as it sounds Star Citizen will have it's own version of Netflix and ESPN. Even crazier... they plan to have an NPC population who will pay attention to screens all around the game universe and react to the content they see on those screens. If you have a base you'll almost certainly want NPC's working for you at that location, if you don't provide what they need, what they want and what they prefer they won't want to work for you - they'll give you a bad rating as an employer.

If you get to meet developers, particularly the senior developers, and you ask them about the NPC's they get a bit of a grin on their face. You might expect that hired NPC's will always do what you expect them to do, but they won't always do that. Some of them, particularly if they aren't happy with you, will scam you, set traps for you. You might hire an NPC to work at your base full of supplies and commodities and while you're away they'll call their friends, disable the security and clean you out. Setting up a base won't simply be a case of looking at your credits and deciding, I'll stick a base here cos i can afford it. It'l be a lot more involved than that.

Again in the past, they said that the most valuable commodity players will be able to gather and trade is information, that incudes local knowledge. You'll have to find out which factions to align with, who can be trusted and who can't. In order to do this there will have to be some sort of scanning and mapping function open to players so that if you find 'something' you can either return to it or sell the scan data and coordinates to it. You'll need to pay attention to the reputation, history and goings on with the local population in your part of the verse. They plan to have a central information repository called the ARK which is in the Tayac system, you will buy and sell data to/from the ARK. But for things like trading commodities, factions and local knowledge you'll also get information about what is going on in the game universe and where from the Spectrum. You might ask yourself, what are other players going to stream to the Spectrum about - they can charge you credits for that content, mainly it will be local knowledge. Who are the main players in the area, who can you trust and who shouldn't you trust, where you can get things. If you just go blindly wandering into a system without checking out it first, you'll be at a significant disadvantage.

If you are unfamiliar with a star system, especially if you're hauling valuable cargo, you can spend hours checking it out before you go, or maybe the best thing you could do is hire a local player guide. Someone who knows the system intimately and can guide you through it or around it with the least fuss, most efficiently and safest way they know. How does that local expert guide let everyone know about their service? Put it on the Spectrum. If you want to provide the premier guide service, pick some base locations very carefully around that system that your customers can use relatively safely.

The Carrack has a command centre planned for the upper bridge, it's likely we'll have our own command centre facility for any bases we set up.

We used to be able to custom place items we owned in our hangars, the tractor beam tech has superseded that form of customisation, we've also been told that we will be able hang pictures and screens on our walls, the pictures are nice for decoration sure, but it's the screens that will provide more useful functionality for gameplay since they are your window into the whole game universe, this is what Render To Texture for communications is about, we will have cameras on different platforms - drones, ships, vehicles etc, not just on the mobiGlas.

What's coming is a far more populated and 'connected' game universe than what seems evident right now, so player bases won't be simply isolated locations from the game universe. Because of the missing features mentioned above it seems the game is just a 'jump in your ship and go see what you find' type of game, but in the future there will be more emphasis on preparing and planning before you jump into your cockpit seat.

iirc they said that beacon will demark areas belonging to a player, the difference being that outside of UEE controlled areas it won't be protected by UEE security forces - but you'll still probably get the trespassing' notice. you can set up your own security to be alerted or respond much like turrets do in some AI bases. So beacons will likely be tied into the new trespass system.

This a a feature of CIG communications, they tend to focus for a period of time on things that are connected by a common theme, although it's not easy to see that sometimes.

I don't think anyone outside of the CIG development team has a full and precisely correct handle on the exact details of how all the component parts fit together, least of all me - I just try to put my perspective so that others can add theirs and between us we can come to a broader understanding, that's why we have (interesting) discussions amongst ourselves to try and make sense of it all. You said you had read some of my posts, in which case you'll know I don't get into back and forth arguments, I just put my case / opinion, let others put their case/opinion and let the readers decide.

So what I'll do is let the Dev's speak for themselves and perhaps that will help clear up this contention about what the stages are for Pyro delivery and Server Meshing:

It is my opinion that it is very easy for anyone to lose track of what they are saying because the video was badly edited, it interrupted the flow of important information with waffle, loss of track and interruptions that should have been edited out, and 'showing the dev's as human' pieces. I'm not saying they shouldn't show us those things, they just shouldn't put them between important pieces of communication.

There is no simultaneity in this statement, all the language they are using is describing a sequential process, they aren't saying Pyro AND server meshing together, they specifically state they are separating the two goals in order to bring Pyro as the first step in the sequence. The Replication Layer is given as the only essential dependency for delivering Pyro Jump Gates because "when you actually do a jump to get to Pyro we have to transfer authority from the Stanton DGS to the Pyro DGS".. and.. "we're separating the actual jump gate stuff from the actual server meshing stuff". If Pyro came WITH server meshing then they wouldn't be 'separate' would they, so what's all the talk about separation for?

Since this was a planning session where previous roadmaps and ideas were reworked, any information given prior has now been superseded - ie all that previous talk of needing server meshing to handle transfer of players between star systems. When they say 'we can assure Pyro delivery, while we worry about server meshing - who interprets that as we'll also deliver server meshing while we worry about how to do it? To my mind no-one would make such an assumption unless they are struggling to understand English.

The exact details of what comes where, and the technicalities, those of us with the motivation to do it can join in the fun talking about that stuff, but the actual delivery of the features, the order in which they come because of dependencies is important to everyone - and the subject of this thread - not just the technically fascinated.

I simply can't understand why anyone didn't watch that video and know:
Pyro with the Jump Gates first with the separation of the Replication Layer to handle transfer of authority between DGS's.
Server Meshing, even though they are still working on it in the meantime, comes later.

You'll notice when he starts talking about this production method the use case scenario he envisions for this technique is for background, not for millimetre close up detail you can walk on, they look good from a distance. This type of technique is used for things like flight simulators where you aren't expected to be walking on the ground or even moving close to the ground except in manually made higher detail landing areas which are separate manually made 3D models placed in/on the planetary grid. Games like flight simulators use lower polygon meshes of blocks of flat (ie the grid is not curved around a sphere) terrain which are loaded in and out of memory as you fly across that terrain it gives the impression that you are flying around the planet as long as you have the hardware that can do it. This is called procedural production of 3D meshes, not in-game procedural generation. CIG dev's also use procedural production to make planetary 3D meshes.

The other technique is to manually make all highly detailed terrain surfaces, this is possible for maps with relatively small amounts of area. If you're developing a game and can have artists work on a 16x16km or even 32x32km for 6 - 8 years you can pour a lot of detail into them up to the limits of the hardware that runs that game, this would be impractical if you are making many planet sized 3D meshes... it's too labour intensive and also it would be too punishing on your PC's resources to create that amount of detail at the scale of planetary horizon to planetary horizon. 3D editors (MAYA, 3D Max, Blender etc) used to create 3D meshes use something called tessellation to increase detail on the 3D mesh surface, the higher the detail the more tessellation you need which increases the RAM size of the 3D model produced because it has more generated polygons - higher detail, more RAM, you also needed higher detailed textures (bigger VRAM load) to load onto those polygons and then you can make use of heightmap detail to create the impression of even more close up detail on the 3D mesh.

Some games, like the games Bethesda makes with Creation Engine - Skyrim V and the coming Starfield - use small hand made / procedurally produced terrain maps which they fit into a grid called cells. Imagine you are standing on a 2 dimensional honeycomb grid, the cell you are in is very detailed, the cells around that cell are less detailed - using lower LOD's, and so on out to distance.

Each cell in (unmodded) Skyrim V had a maximum memory load size of 3.99GB for all assets in that player occupied cell, the main limitation with this technique is that each cell is manually made and takes time to load into memory (RAM) as you move from cell to cell, this is why games that use this type of technology while they look very detailed close up don't allow you to travel at speed over terrain and they generally have medieval themes because of it - which is why you won't be flying your ship over the planet surfaces in Starfield, they don't even plan to have land vehicles to drive. If you do move at speed, usually because some modder has given the game that capability what you get is a lot of 'popping in' of assets as the cells you leave behind are streamed out of RAM and the cells ahead are loaded into RAM.

It's also why those types of games are generally single player games because rendering from multiple viewpoints (multiple cells) would be very expensive on RAM/VRAM loading. You would be seeing the other player in their cell standing in a sparsely populated less detailed area than the cell you were standing in, the other player thinks he's crouched down in dense grass and bushes because his cell is fully loaded on his machine, but you only see the grass and bushes in your cell, not his - of course he can't see your cells grass and bushes either only his grass and bushes. Star Citizen can be multiplayer because it doesn't have this problem, they don't use small cell RAM/VRAM loading.

In his presentation about Starfield Todd Howard explained how you will pick a place to land on a moon or planet from orbit, there will then be a fly down to planet loading screen while the landing cell area is loaded into RAM and the space area is unloaded from RAM - he called it 'procedurally placed'. This was the same technique Chris had planned back in 2012 you can see it in old Star citizen videos. You can then roam on foot and the cells are loaded/unloaded around you as move across the terrain so that you have the impression it is a whole planet to free roam about - as long as you don't go too fast or too high.

I'm sure that Bethesda has increased the cell memory load size and will take advantage of modern fast RAM, and cheaper larger sizes of RAM sticks as well as rapid access storage drives that will make for more detailed close in and overall terrain, but that single cell at a time RAM load time limitation still remains. This technique wouldn't work for Star Citizen where you can move at high speed, close to ground, in your highly detailed ships, all of the planet or moon 3D mesh is loaded into RAM at once and they use Object Container Streaming (rather than area streaming) and LOD's loaded into RAM to create detail as you all move around and every player sees exactly the same objects as you do.

The technique that Star Citizen currently uses is to have heightmap generated terrain in the 3D editor create a 3D mesh to increase the speed of planetary production, which is saved to the hard drive of their servers downloaded to your game files and loaded into the game, and then overlay those with manually made separate 3D rock formations (Objects within Object Containers) which are scattered and blended into the heightmap terrain which 'on the fly via your GPU adds surface detail to the procedurally produced planetary mesh. As you can see from the above video they are thinking about methods to increase scale and one technique he mentions in the video is to have heightmaps on top of heightmaps to build scale, this still suffers from the vertical stretching problem if you try to take it too far - but they are working on that. They simply don't have the option to do what other games do and manually make vertical terrain at the scale and volume they need to produce content for a multiplayer game.

The general rule is: You can have small and very detailed (single player) or you can have large and less detailed (multiplayer) this directly affects the type of gameplay you can engage in, you can't have both because of hardware limitations - but they are pushing the bounds of what they can do with very large and yet detailed multiplayer capable terrain.

If you could define what you mean by exploration we could start from there since it is a broad term.

It could mean just roaming around known places that you haven't been, you can 'explore' your back garden.

If however you are referring to exploration in the sense of new discovery of places that are unmapped then it has dependencies:

Jump point traversal and discovery - they have shown development work on Jump Points.

Life support for long range travel - it's on the Roadmap

Ships capable of mining / refining for refuelling, and refuelling ship to ship from ships with long range capability carrying fuel as cargo - already in the game and features of planned ships to come.

Radar, mapping and navigation - improved long range detection, scanning and navigation are on the Roadmap. They have concepted ships specifically for this purpose.

Wear and tear, aging and malfunctioning of ships and their component systems. Engineering gameplay - On the Roadmap and currently being implemented in the game.

Unexplored systems, or unexplored parts of known star systems - some are on the Roadmap: Pyro, Nyx and Odin systems are currently being worked on. There are likely more for Squadron 42, we just don't know, the idea that Squadron 42 only includes the Odin system is frankly preposterous. One Roadmap entry of note is called 'Outer System', which involves building out the outer fringes of the Odin system, if Squadron 42 was a POI to POI purely 'go here do this' game experience then why build out a whole outer system for the Odin system, why not just the places they intend to send you to? If they are going to those lengths for what was an add on system to the main story line then it's likely they'll develop other Squadron 42 systems to the same extent.

Content for unexplored systems such as flora, fauna and biomes including weather, space phenomena and their effects on ships systems, currently some are on the Roadmap others have been discussed in CIG video presentations (alien creatures and boids, solar flares and radiation, meteor storms) there are likely others for Squadron 42 etc we don't know about.

There are more features we could also count as dependencies for exploration gameplay, such as EVA traversal and use of ropes / tractor beams and even storage and cargo management, even medical gameplay and ships to support it but the above demonstrates the scope of development required to enable exploration at minimum level at least.

Talking about exploration gameplay specifically when all we have currently is the Stanton system - which is fully mapped according to lore - is a bit pointless, especially when the systems required for long range space traversal and mapping are still a work in progress. When you consider the above dependencies you realise they are talking about the capabilities for long range exploration all the time and a significant proportion of development resources are being devoted to it.

Is it coming? Considering it was one of the core elements spoken of from the very inception of the project and the fact that the majority voted it their most desired form of gameplay, and they have sold concept ships specifically for long range exploration I'd say they are well aware it would be considered a vital feature of the game to come.

Considering all the dependencies is it surprising that it is likely to be the one gameplay mechanic that will take the longest to develop? I haven't even mentioned all the backend systems currently being worked on required to make a multi-star system game.

I realise that the above answer won't satisfy some people, but to say nothing is being done for exploration gameplay or that they don't talk about it is somewhat disingenuous.

The more you post arrogantly telling everyone they are wrong the clearer it becomes that you seem to have problems understanding English and your technical understanding is limited - he's right, they clearly said the spawned damaged sections were placeholder.

We know Maelstrom is the name they have given to their new model for deformation and destructibility and it doesn't involve spawning in of objects, it's real time deformation with physical properties controlled by the UV's.

Perhaps you might consider dropping the attitude and developing a little humility.

We have mag stripping / filling to come as well as weapon stripping and cleaning. I believe they have talked about different types of ballistic ammo.

The camera being fixed to the players eye and actually looking down the gunsight was something Chris always wanted from the beginning, which of course meant they could allow players to hold and aim a weapon while looking around away from the direction of weapon aim, hence the combined first and third person rigging which was also always planned.

Having weapons as object containers made up of separate entities allows for weapon customisations. Different stocks, barrels, sights, magazines etc. It creates variety without the need to create multiple whole new 3D models of weapons just because of a slight variation.

The weapon interior being modelled taking up resources is not the huge drain on resources some seem to think it is because they have occlusion culling.

The bullet physicalisation also allows for real bullet physics according to location: destructible object density, atmospheric density, temperature, humidity / precipitation, wind, gravity, planetary spin etc. There's an old movie with Rock Hudson called Ice Station Zebra. One of the scenes has a US Marine say that a bullet travels just as fast at the north pole as anywhere else and the British Secret Service agent explains to him why this isn't true because of the cold denser air at the north pole and the change in Coriolis effect at that latitude. We have player controlled weapon sighting planned for the game.

Ship weapon convergence will likely be a feature players can control eventually because ship weapons will be used in a wide variety of environments.

Chris Roberts himself is changing the way hit point registration works, he's making the bounding box for each 3D model conform to the actual model (if you know how 3D models are made you'll know what the bounding box is) and so the collision physics of projectiles and the physical properties of the target will determine the damage done to whatever they actually collide with, they have talked about penetration, deformation, ricochets and fragmentation. This means if you shoot through a gap in a fence it won't do what other games do and have the bullet hit an invisible barrier, you'll actually be able to shoot through the gap.

We're still in Alpha with many things at tier 0 implementation. Talking about the years of development is not relevant because no-one has ever done things like this before, no-one knows how long it is all supposed to take this is R&D on the run at the coal face - and that's exactly why it had to be crowdfunded. Anyone who joined the project since Dec 23rd 2015 should know that this project will be in constant development, anyone who joined before that date should also know that CIG have put mechanisms in place to have an 'out' (even with a personal profit) and so it is up to each individual now to make a choice, ask yourself whether you want to support a project in continual development with constant iteration or leave. You can always come back later.

Those who keep harping on about the game being in permanent alpha think they are the majority, you're not, just about everyone now knows exactly what this project is and that is part of the reason it is so successful because people can always hope and dream for more than they would get from other game projects. We don't get streamers abandoning other games and coming to Star Citizen because they are bored of the other games, they come because they know they'll never be told.. 'That's it, that's all you're getting'. There's always more to talk about and look forward to... no limits.

Extrapolating from current performance limitations due to backend architecture is a little pointless... it's all going to change. Anyone who says they didn't want that level of detail and instead wanted the game earlier with less detail and features obviously weren't listening to their plans and thinking about the ramifications of what Chris and CIG said from the very beginning. None of it delayed production of the game because it was always the plan, it's the other stuff like spherical grid planets (and the knock on effects required to support them) and the backend architecture that have taken the time... and it was the community who demanded those features.

Some just don't like change. Makes you wonder why they are here in the first place.

There's no difference between CIG and any other game developer, it's just that with other games in development you never get to hear about those changes and the 'standard' game development cycle doesn't allow for much R&D while you build the game.

The whole point of the project was to do things differently... and they are.

I suggest people watch the video again, listen carefully. They originally planned to release Pyro with server meshing, they clearly state that is taking longer than expected and so Pyro (4.0) is to come before SM and they said they were hoping for 4.0 by the end of the year.

It is to do with communication between the Hybrid layer running on the DGS and the persistence layer. There's nothing you can do.

The hybrid layer is going to be replaced by the Replication Layer Gateway Service which won't run on DGS's.

We very often get someone coming into the forums saying how they'd like to see features of a new engine demo in the game. Those of us who've been around awhile know that from tech demo to actual use in a game generally takes a few years. We also know to look for what they don't show you.

PC's have finite resources, if you're using RAM or a CPU thread for one thing, it means you can't use that same thread or block of RAM for another thing at the same time. The video looks like a big open world, but is it really? Did you see them flying at speed over hundreds of kilometres per hour or did you see a fairly slow wheeled vehicle meandering around the same general area and what was in that area? Nothing but surface rock. No plants, trees, clouds, wildlife or even other vehicles. Did you notice there was a constant circular ridge on the horizon, just like you were in a big old crater? No sea with lapping waves reflecting the sky, or a flowing river and waterfall. No rain.

Let's take that Unreal Engine 5 demo for example, lot's of plants (dense jungle in fact) and a high detailed vehicle driving around a very small area slowly - no distant horizon, no other vehicles in the vicinity, certainly no close up view of a vehicle zooming down a long road flanked by dense jungle. No wildlife.

OK so what about the UE 5 demo showing the cave and the player(?) walking around and even flying over some of that terrain - Nanites! - notice there was a cave with high detailed statues? To a gamer that's a fascinating area to explore, to a game developer a cave is a chance to unload 'stuff' from RAM and load in more 'stuff', that's why the cave is so captivatingly detailed, so you don't run through it faster than they can load the next part into RAM. Notice the surrounding terrain wasn't nearly as detailed as the close up terrain? When the player exited the cave - much less detailed terrain to fly over. She wasn't flying close to the ground at around 10 feet or so.

I have no doubt that CIG will have tracks in the surface, but in order to do it they would have to unburden some of the RAM / GPU / CPU load because there is always a trade off.. that's why multiplayer games are generally less detailed normally because when you have multiple viewpoints all demanding their own level of detail from each point that resource load is increased markedly, one vehicle leaving track marks on a barren rock surface is nice, 20 - 30 or 40 vehicles all leaving track marks that persist is stupendous!

The day they release a massive open world you can fly over at 20 feet at 500m/s in a ship you can look out of through the windows and see 20 vehicles on the ground with windows onto detailed interiors and players running around in them, in any direction you care to look and see that same level of detail in a multiplayer game on UE 5 - at the same level of detail CIG can do now, yet alone what is to come, then I'll be impressed. I'm not holding my breath, it won't be for a good while. By the time it happens we'll have people come in the forum swooning over Unreal Engine 6 demo's.

Could you link your source for "Sq42 has been rewritten twice now" please - it's news to me. I know they made additions to the original plan for Squadron 42 but that was, and must have been, before summer of 2015 because that was when all the motion capture and dialogue were done at Imaginarium in London, so the story was pretty much set in stone by the end of 2015 because if they had AAA rated actors coming in for rewrites and new mocap I'm pretty sure we would know about it - we do get to see the yearly financials and Andy Serkis' Imaginarium studios are not exactly cheap to hire.

Dismissing StarEngine as merely 'CryEngine' is very disingenuous, even suggesting that StarEngine is just a re-badged Lumberyard is also disingenuous. The number of changes they have made are significant, and they are ongoing. Search Star Citizen Youtube for 'Teaching a character to walk' for example and you'll see a former CryTek R&D team senior team member who now works at Foundry 42 DE updating the engine to use the spherical planetary tech you don't find in either of the above engines mentioned. I'm fairly sure they don't have 64bit floating point precision, object container streaming, and they do use global illumination that Star Citizen / Squadron 42 doesn't use.

Something few realise yet many experience in the game is that they changed the way player commands are executed, you input a command, instead of that command being executed locally on the game client that command goes up to the server (currently) or the Replication Layer eventually where the command is executed and the resultant 'change state' that command causes is then sent out to each connected player to see simultaneously (or as near as can be gotten given ping rates). The 'lag' people report in the game is not player ping lag, it's server runtime / backend network bandwidth related.

If you watch the Squadron 42 vertical slice with directors commentary you'll hear Chris Roberts mention that they had to change the number of unique character animations supported by CryEngine / Lumberyard because they had blown past 32,000 in 2017 - and they haven't finished yet. For context the Skyrim Creation Kit which is a version of the Creation Engine toolkit they use to make Skyrim V and Fallout has a maximum of around 2,500 character animations.

Neither the current version of CryEngine nor Lumberyard can have you sit in a parked vehicle aboard another ship moving in atmosphere, let alone fire a projectile out the first vehicle, through the interior of the second vehicle out into the atmosphere and into another ship and another vehicle inside that ship to shoot it's occupants... not even in single player.

Someone did ask a question in the 'Ask A Dev' section of the forums about what changes had been made to the CryEngine /Lumberyard and the dev who responded listed them, he reached the word count limit and said that it was nowhere near an exhaustive list, just the ones he could think of at the time.

You'd have to dig to find the information about the following they have said on camera they are planning:

Destructible environments and objects in the game. With full persistence of that state of destruction.

Real time deformation of objects in the game - ships that warp and buckle, bent wings and landing gear for example. They also showed a field full of plants that bent and twisted when a player walked through them.

You're assuming Squadron 42 taking the majority of resources is somehow slowing the ATC rework, there's no evidence for that, in fact it's much more likely that the ATC rework is dependent on the changes to both persistence and server performance improvements - whether they come from server meshing or not. Other features that had work done in Squadron 42 first are coming to the PU soon™ presumably they don't have dependencies on the backend services to come.

Absolutely, don't believe anything until you see it in the game, healthy skepticism is not a bad thing, however suggesting something is so for all to read - without evidence but merely on the assumption 'CIG bad' - is a different category. As a strategy it just won't work, we know that too. You can have any opinion you like but that shouldn't dominate your communication with the dev team or the community, there is a tried and tested method to get them to respond, and that definitely isn't it. It gives them the same impression as it does others in the community, you don't look like you want real answers, you're just here to vent your frustration. If you want them to treat you with respect, then behave respectfully and with self control.

You have to ask the right questions without prefacing it with opinion, if it's a burning issue for a significant proportion of the community encourage them to ask the right questions calmly and respectfully, they will address it we have plenty of opportunities to ask questions - even in person, it might not be the answer you wished for. They have in the past.

There are very good reasons to purchase multiple copies of Squadron 42.

You are creating a unique character in Squadron 42 with their own history, it is not like other single player FPS games where the character you play is fixed and named, endless playthroughs because nothing changes. There will be choices to make during the campaign and those choices have to be unique to your character history, you can't go back and change your character history by trying all the choices - you will be able to replay the combat sections to improve your score, probably in the combat training simulator (It's the one they use for Arena Commander), that simulator performance does not affect your characters history arc. If you want to replay the whole campaign to try different choices you have to start with a brand new character from the very beginning. In the early days Chris talked about selling extra character slots to existing game owners.

Each character you create can/will retire to the PU with all history, possessions and benefits they accrue in Squadron 42. From the perspective of the PU Squadron 42 will be the most massive Squadron that ever existed because there will be hundreds of thousands of Squadron members who all fought in the same place at the same time but each making a unique set of choices during that military service. Chris has done this (in a somewhat more limited fashion) in his other games. Wing Commander Prophecy, you can't change choices once made in the story elements and you can only replay combat sections of the game in the simulator. You can start the WCP game from the beginning with the same character, however, that wasn't his choice. Squadron 42 is not an 'on rails' game.

There will be effects on your ex-military PU character depending on what you did during your military service... the PU AI will know you! Some may be very happy with you because of Squadron 42 and what you did, some may not like you at all because of what you did with that character. That's why Squadron 42 has to be single player even though it takes place in the exact same universe as the PU - as Jared puts it 'Squadron 42 is basically one huge dynamic mission set inside the PU', it's set in recent history.

That's what Chris is referring to when he talks about going back into more exploits with YOUR characters that YOU created. You aren't paying to play a game, you're paying to create totally unique characters in this game universe and live out their lives, and that life includes Squadron 42. Your first experience of that 'alive' populated 'living breathing universe' will be in Squadron 42. The PU will likely remain unreleased until it is capable of taking all of that Squadron 42 universe because they are intimately connected.

Suggesting that CIG should drop Squadron 42 only shows that the person making that remark has no idea what Squadron 42 is and how it relates to your characters' life in the PU. You can create and play a character in the PU who never served in the military, but that character will have a very different experience of the PU than the one who did do military service.

Interesting, both combined. AI wingmen coming to the PU but also AI directing that fleet... that is what a player 'can do' and the AI crew can 'do anything the player can do'. Hmm...

I'm not sure I'd use the word 'failed', but yes, they switched to pCache (persistence Cache) where the database is hierarchical not sequential.

Why not 'failed'?
The system they were using for iCache was sequential database lookups, but what does that mean exactly?

As an example let's say Youtube are selling customer account information to a marketing agency who have a client that wants to sell cat litter. Youtube could supply a complete client list to the marketing agency who then run a search through that customer database for those who have cat videos in their subscribed feed. They start at Aardvarkian and go all the way through to Zwicky and each name that has the tag 'likes cat videos' is printed on a sequential list - all good they have a target marketing audience to blitz. However it's slow because you're not just searching the target, you're searching (and paying for!) non-target accounts too, fine if speed of look-ups is not essential.

When the entity list in the PU was small sequential look-ups didn't take so much time but as the player base increased and the number of in-game entities increased sequential look-ups became just too slow.

They went back to the world of customer databases and found a type which organised the database by hierarchical structure, no more requirement to sequential look-ups you can search by entity ID tag.

An example - not meant to reflect actual in-practise methodology.
Let's say they want to search the game space for all instances of a Custodian SMG. Instead of going through ID = Game universe, ID = planet - all planets ID = moon - all moons = ID = outpost - all outposts, all players, all local inventories and all shop inventories in a sequential top level (starting at Entity ID tag = game universe and down) search they can just search for ID-Custodian_SMG and they will only get back a list of all instances showing the stipulated level entity hierarchy that has that weapon as well as related information they stipulate according to hierarchy. Where they get a positive hit, all lower hierarchy information in the tree related to that ID is also collected.

Because the database is now hierarchical they can further refine the search by stipulating a higher level in the hierarchy - ie search all player entity ID's with Custodian SMG attached. Much faster and it also fits very well with the hierarchical structure of nested object containers - it's a better fit and it's significantly faster doing look-ups because you're not searching where the thing you want to find isn't. This is what all professionals in any discipline are trained to do - plan, evaluate and collect data, adapt and re-plan. They found a better tool for the job in the face of a changing situation and implemented it well before persistence went live. This in no way automatically means the switch to pCache delayed anything, other work could continue.

It's called creative thinking and adaptation to suit a changing environment - not failure.

Exactly so, that is what Quantum does. Each character has a set of personality traits assigned, they have needs (both based on the game economy and their own preferences) and wants, faction affiliations (politics) and a given set of resources to begin with. They are run via a set of equations with somewhat probabilistic outcomes in this virtual simulation which can simulate millions of them on these Quantum simulation servers because they don't have the computational overhead of simulating the real physicalised game universe.

They take 'change state' information from the running DGS's reporting to the persistence layer, and from Quasar (which inputs information about distribution of resources and the effects of them on the economy), and run these characters through the simulation at periodic intervals, thus the characters (as well as their locations in the game) change over time. They live a life and they die. Factions will fight each other and the resultant potential imbalances that brings, politics will go on, natural disasters will occur and all that will feed into the simulation.

What CIG plan is a 'living breathing universe' that goes on whether there are players there to see it or not. It is the reason for the complex backend systems they have designed. The game will be a simulation of the universe which includes Quantum and Quasar, just like any actions taken by players the events of the simulation are passed through the Replication Layer Gateway Service to the persistence layer, each spinning up Dedicated Game Server will query the persistence layer for the up to the second state of that simulated always running game universe.

Why is this important? - it's about hardware and how it works.
Nothing can change if it exists merely as information on a hard drive, dynamic change can only happen when a part of the game universe is loaded in RAM and processes run on that data, they call this 'change state information', so if the only time that a game location were loaded into RAM was when it was loaded onto a DGS then periods when no players were present in an area would result in that area being static, unchanging. This is not a living breathing universe.

It is exactly the same for AI characters all of whom will be unique, they can't 'do stuff' if they are only information held on a hard drive. The Quantum simulation is not merely an economy simulator, it runs a simulation of the whole game population. If you do watch the presentation by TZ he describes a character who is 'doing stuff', a pirate with his own history log. At some point that character is in a location which is being spun up on a DGS and so that simulated character is 'Instantiated' into the 'real game' as a game character where you could encounter him. When that DGS spins down that character goes back to the Quantum simulation to carry on his virtual life. The only reason to spin up DGS's with an area of the game physicalised is if there are players in that area to see it. If the game only changed things in areas where players were, and not where players aren't, then it wouldn't be a dynamic living breathing universe.

The game universe will not only have players affecting the game universe it will, as others have described in limited fashion, have a whole host of AI driven NPC's. Some will be workers responding to a dynamic economy, some will be military responding to events and some will even be politicians, media stars and sports stars as well as an elite class of the rich and shameless. You create a unique character in this universe and the intent is that you will live a life in this dynamic universe. You could win the Murray Cup Racing Tournament, or at least participate in it. You could be a news reporter with a Reliant MAKO News Van who goes around the verse reporting to the Spectrum. This is nothing like EvE Online.

What life you lead will be affected by:
Whether or not you chose to bring your Squadron 42 character to the PU after military retirement. You can gain citizenship without starting Squadron 42, but you will never get ex-military status without starting Squadron 42.
What actions you take and what affiliations with NPC political/criminal groups you engage in - your history log.
What happens in the wider dynamic universe.

Choosing not to start Squadron 42 and take that character into the PU will mean you start as a civilian and you have no military history log and property / expertise / or credentials (pilots license, security clearances etc) that goes with you into the PU. There is a misunderstanding for example that playing Squadron 42 to a certain level 'gives you' an F8C Lightning when you enter the PU - it doesn't, it gives you what Chris calls 'a badge' and Erin Roberts calls 'a licence' that allows you to own and operate the F8C Lightning legally within UEE controlled systems, you still have to pay for it but frontline military equipment capable of being a significant challenge to UEE security forces is limited by the UEE to those it trusts. You could obtain and operate an F8C illegally, but that runs the risk that it will be confiscated if you are caught by security forces.

There is a story that will be ongoing for the Star Citizen universe, the PU starts it's timeline (and never stops running) when the game is finally live, the timeline starts shortly after the events of Squadron 42 (all epsiodes). Squadron 42 will be the first experience of being in that universe timeline for your character, it is set inside the Star Citizen universe. The UEE does have an Imperator you can vote for, it does have a Senate and you can vote for your local Senator, and it will have some form of local to each star systems' choice of governance elections. These are not 'background flavour' you can only read about by going to some menu - these characters will exist in the game universe. Unaligned star systems are basically the wild west.

There are social strata in the Star Citizen / Squadron 42 universe. Characters, both player and NPC, will either be non-affiliated with the UEE - ie they have no legal status within the UEE. They can be civilians within the UEE or they can be citizens of the UEE. Each social strata will have an impact on the experience of players - for example civilians pay more federal tax than citizens, but they have other limitations. There are 3 ways to gain citizenship within the UEE:
Earn it by gaining a good reputation with the UEE and it's security forces - this will take time.
Buy it - it will be expensive.
Join the military or security forces - the only way to do that is by starting Squadron 42. Ergo, you joined up.

Citizenship can also be revoked by the UEE, for example if the character engages in criminal behaviour.

As well as the 'federal' UEE there are local (state) law systems in each star system, as well as local law enforcement and taxes. Again, remember this is an always live universe that changes whether there are players around to see it happen or not because of that always running background universe simulation. Star Citizen will have 'game masters' who can trigger events in this universe and the consequences of those events will roll out across the game universe, also it has never been stated that the Vanduul war reached any final resolution, so we expect it to be ongoing in the PU too.

In closing - you will have a character backstory, you can choose to have a military history log or merely a civilian history log when you enter the PU. The complex social strata of politics, wealth, media, sports, factions will also influence both each individual character and the wider game universe. Your navigation through this ever changing game universe with each character you create is totally up to you. You are but a player strutting your hour on the stage and then no more... until you create a new character.

Arena Commander and the simpods it runs in was originally developed as a military training simulator according to the lore of the Star Citizen universe. Those training simpods, and thus Arena Commander, are an integral part of Squadron 42, they have been since the very beginning.

Some of the language used by followers of the project, and to an extent CIG themselves, leads to misunderstandings about Squadron 42 - it is not a separate project. The events of Squadron 42 take place in the wider Star Citizen universe but in the recent past, as Jared described it ''Squadron 42 is basically one huge dynamic mission in the Star Citizen universe''.

Another misunderstanding is that Squadron 42 is like other first person games where the chapters have cutscenes and menu screens between them, this is not the case. When you enter the Squadron 42 game the clock starts running and it doesn't jump around, you can pause it to exit the game but when you resume you'll be back at the same time point. When they talk of 'scenes' in the game they are talking about specific events that you will be witness to where the camera control focuses on the main story character at that point but you can break out of them.

Also there is the Spectrum. It is like the internet, it is the means by which we are both informed and entertained. Some of the story elements will be delivered to screens within the game via the Spectrum, you won't have menu screens to read to find out what is going on and why things are happening... all that backstory, and much more, will be delivered via the Spectrum.

The Replication Layer has never been described as 'difficult' but as the most complex part of the remaining integrated plan. It is the part that has never been done before, server meshing in various forms has been done before.

Will it take longer than expected? Very probably, will they reassess the order in which the core pillars are implemented - they definitely have according to them.

Of course if it weren't a live released alpha no-one would know about any of this because this type of R&D is usually done in secret and it is certainly not unknown for game developers to do such R&D and then abandon it. Because of the stated aims and goals given out by public statements we can have the benefit that such features are much less likely to be abandoned, merely that new and novel ways of achieving those goals will be sought, this agility is what comes from being funded by a community just as interested (in the main) in those end goals as the developers are.

If someone was around pre-2016 and followed the project they would know that CIG have delivered a more expansive game and capabilities than was originally 'promised' - this is why the detractors keep yelling 'feature creep!'. you can't have it both ways, you can't accuse CIG of failing on promises while accusing them of massive scope creep. Make your mind up, which is it?

If you look around the game space you'll see banking terminals these are to facilitate features they have mooted over the years:
Item insurance
Cargo insurance
Ship insurance
Bank loans
Taxes related to place, status (non-citizens pay higher/more taxes) income and transfers of property on death

Since they are all tied into an overall economy rather than being some feature that allows an activity to seem to take place then it is not appropriate to incorporate them into the game while it is still in Alpha - being wiped and with bugs that affect the overall economy.

We have the character reset which has been refined to account for some of the issues we find in the Alpha and likely will get refined further. However it is a feature that is open to abuse so that care must be taken.

Painful though it seems they are in the testing phase and 'our' loss is thus their gain because they can collect metrics and observe behaviours.

You can't lose anything permanently that is attributed to your account until the game goes live and we must accept that the final live version is their primary concern as they work toward it, not how players feel today, but even so the possibility of loss has always been one of the tenets of the realism we can expect of the future finished product. What you lose and how you lose it will be up to you once all the systems are in place. There are mechanisms both now and to come in the future which allow replacement of items you have lost. A 'never lose a thing in your life' game is not in any way realistic, you will lose things - get used to the idea.

A little add to that - one of the founding members of CIG and current vice-chairman (also a board member of Turbulent), a long time friend of Chris, legal counsel to Ascendant Pictures a movie production company owned by Chris is a lawyer specialising in the area of media and entertainment production. I would think if anybody knew about copyright issues in the field it would be him.

Except that Squadron 42 is the Star Citizen universe, they are not separate entities as some seem to assume. There are no 'blackouts' on the Starmap. Everything that is in Squadron 42 comes to the PU.

I agree and have stated so in other threads that they are too draconian in their imposition of a blackout on information regarding Squadron 42. If this were a standalone title being worked on all well and good about spoilers, but it isn't and never was.

Not that it changes much I know but Chris did mention changes to Concierge in one of his last communications and it was also mentioned at recent-ish fan organised event in Germany.

We did get the extra game packages for those that qualified and we did get the collectible Chairmans Club Handbook as an exclusive.

I don't particularly care about Concierge rewards, but I do agree that when compared to referral rewards you have to raise an eyebrow. Those referral rewards do seem a tad over-generous, especially if you've spent signifi-bucks going through F5 trauma for years to get a Javelin and some recent convert from ED with all their existing viewers gets one in a matter of weeks for free (one guy went from zero to maxed referrals in 10 days!). As a marketing ploy it's genius, as a salute to those who have made a significant individual contribution - not so much.

There's something I don't understand - several of the top recruiters have maxed out their rewards and instead of offering to use the referral code of another (perhaps for a contribution to their Youtube channel?) they just keep going. I know, I know gaming the system and all that, I'm just intrigued that no-one has to my knowledge, why not do what Star Citizen Reddit does and throw all your channel subscribers into a referral code lottery? I haven't even seen any of them say.. hey I'm maxed out I'm going to use the code for my video editor / moderators for a while. Youtubers generally get rewards through their Youtube channel already.

Now if you consider guide rewards against referral rewards, there's a lot more hard graft in being a guide not least because they had to put in the time to learn it all in order to guide someone, and they don't have paying subscribers or Paypal donors.

As I say, I don't really care about rewards but there should be some apparent balance, fairness. There's no escaping the notion that rewards seem much more about perceived benefit to CIG than they are about recognising any level of commitment or contribution to the project by individual backers.

EDIT:
With the benefit of hindsight I would propose a different system, not multiple reward pathways but just one tiered reward system based upon points.

Tier 1 reward:
$50 in your personal account contributed 1point, or x number of referrals 1 point, or x number of guide hours 1point, or x number of IC reports submitted and confirmed 1 point, or x number of subscriber months 1 point - or a combination of all.

Once you reach a certain tier level / points level you get automatic entry to the Chairmans Club.

I think we're into that Alpha WIP/Tier 0/cost vs benefit formula that so few seem to take account of or understand.

If a bug or feature affects a minority (even if they are loud about it) then it's the long term goals of the project that take priority, and absolutely should. Resources are finite.

When people make videos about this stuff, no matter which side of the fence they are on and especially when they extrapolate Arena Commander flight/fight into the PU they always forget to make one thing clear. In Arena Commander the aim is to score high with kills, in the PU the aim is to stay alive. How you approach your particular 'win condition' has its effects in the skills and tactics you should learn.

I was invited by a friend, a well known Arena Commander veteran to join a team vs team fight. It was in the days of the small map Arena Commander. In the initial onrush I lost all weapons and 1 or 2 thrusters but half an hour later after watching them kill each other repeatedly and respawn I was still alive with no respawn because I wasn't playing their game. I had no interest in being top of the kill board. They kept saying 'How are you still alive!'

In the past several years, with periods of random attack griefing at it's peak I haven't used my guns once and I always fly the stock loadout for each ship. I've been 'killed' about 3 or 4 times and each time it was because I wasn't concentrating (setting up controls etc) or not even in the cockpit seat. I don't count destruction from collision with invisible or random unavoidable objects. I've been pulled out of QT lot's of times and I always get away because I prepare before I start the QT.

There are easy skills to learn that minimise the potential for being attacked, one of the main skills being to simply have the patience to consider all options rather than become fixated, and fairly easy skills to learn to escape and evade (at least long enough to call for assistance) so while I'm quite happy for the pew pew veterans to have their input taken into consideration by CIG I do bemoan this attitude that all 'non-fighters' are somehow only lambs to the slaughter in Star Citizen - they most certainly are not. Not including those skills in the 'easy to learn, hard to master' skillset requirement is in my view short-sighted and overly narrow focused. It's also worth noting, you can't kill anyone if you're already dead, and the fastest way to get dead is to have the attitude that you'd rather die than be slightly inconvenienced. This narrow focus on weapon balancing and the flight model gives people the wrong impression.

I will watch what happens with master-modes with interest and I will have my input if they make escape and evade either significantly more difficult or near impossible.

When you choose your ship and activity it is up to you to be aware of the potential weak points in your use strategy and to learn to ameliorate those risks as much as possible, leaping without looking first is the primary cause of death - not griefing, not elite light fighter pilots, not weaknesses in the flight model, not weapon imbalance.

If I can survive, using every type of 'non-fighter' ship without firing a weapon for years exactly how is the 'light fighter meta' the dominant force in the PU game? Finding alternate strategies to 'Someone shot at me! I must put all my concentration and resources into shooting back!' is only going to get easier as the game gets more fleshed out.

There are no 'cut-scenes' for Squadron 42. There are times during gameplay where the camera is focused on NPC actors or remote to view a scene in progress, but you can break out of it. There are Spectrum videos you will watch on in-game screens... but no cut-scenes.

This is a value judgement, while there are those who may share your attitude it doesn't accurately reflect what is happening.

A game is like a jigsaw puzzle, there's no way for anyone to make a full judgement on it until all the pieces are in.

The second part of your argument is that it is taking too long. Again a value judgement but based upon what? How other games are made? The majority of games are made behind locked doors and no-one gets to even hear about them until they are in the feature complete stage. Even when they reveal a game they virtually never detail all the R&D that went into making the game engine that produced that game.

Let's take Starfield as an example. They are using Creation Engine 2, a revised and hopefully updated version of Creation Engine which itself was based on the Gamebryo engine which by the time they wanted to make Skyrim V they felt was outdated. The Creation Engine began development around 2011.

Bethesda don't, and likely won't, talk about any adjunct tools they have developed to make Starfield - so that is an unknown.

Listening carefully to Todd Howard's presentation on Starfield I was listening to hear how they had updated Creation Engine because I have used it to make Skyrim V mods, I know it's capabilities and limitations (somewhat). The only new feature he mentioned, proud as he was of the work his team had done, was that now NPC's can use ladders. Yes that's definitely different to Skyrim V.

You want 'a game' but seem oblivious to what needs to be done to actually make a game. The amount of R&D that CIG has done is quite frankly phenomenal in the time when compared to other game engines, they have tackled problems that other studios don't even dare to attempt because the plan is to make a game on a scale, and yet at an FPS level usually only for 'small map games' , that is what other game developers would call 'daunting'. The reason they can do that is because of the unique partnership they have made with a community to develop a funding model that otherwise would not support that amount of R&D.

So how long should it take? No-one knows, not even CIG because it has never been done this way before. There is nothing to make a comparison to. The whole point of the project was to make the end goal paramount rather than producing a known product to satisfy a bunch of investors simply looking to make a profit.

Star Citizen was from inception intended to be a co-partnership between game developers and their gaming community, something never attempted by any game developer and outside of a few niche indy projects it has never been done this way before.

It's not finished yet, it's not even feature complete yet, indeed many of the tools they need to make it all a reality are still in development (refinement) and many many times over the last 10 years people have told them they would never be able to do the things they plan to do - yet they have done those things. Yes, sometimes it took longer than they, or we, hoped but the point is - they have done it. It's very hard to see how all the the things fit together to make that whole jigsaw puzzle a reality, especially if you have little to no inside knowledge of the way things are usually done.

The game is not 'broken' because you can only apply such a term to finished released game. Star Citizen is still being built piece by piece with many pieces yet to go in and one of the main draws for many to this project is that we get to see all the processes that go into making this puzzle fit together, see how the sausage gets made.

You don't have to stay to watch it, but whatever you decide you and anyone else is welcome to come and enjoy the fruits of all that labour, and community patience, when it does finally come together.

If you want to be pedantic, then Starfield has been at the very least 12 years in development and it still doesn't have some of the capabilities that this 'broken alpha' has right now, and unless there are some truly heroic modders out there, it never will. Todd Howard in his Starfield presentation acknowledged the input (thus work) from years of people modding Bethesda games and we know some of those advances will feature in Starfield... they used them in their Skyrim V VR release as well.

Me also, far too much favouritism. Lot's of 'maybe'.

Yes. I also think they over-promised interaction with the community because they didn't realise how big it would become. Chris has stated as much several times.

Yes. They were a lot more optimistic and happy to theory craft.

How I feel about Chris is best explained from my own professional career.
As a registered nurse working in a very busy Accident and Emergency department we would be rushed off our feet for 12 hours straight sometimes, no breaks and literally running from patient to patient meanwhile the waiting area was full of people who had waited hours to be seen, uncomfortable, worried and in the main just needing some reassurance that we would take care of them before they got to the stage it was all too much. They have no idea of the work being done behind closed doors. I can't clear a bed because I'm waiting on this X-Ray to be done, the other patients lab tests to come back for doctors review. They would come in and be snappy, or even downright angry with the nursing staff, of course we can't detail all the work and patients we'd seen in the hours they waited - professional confidentiality - so we offer sympathy, we understand how they feel but we can't do any more than we are doing, and offer platitudes along with a plan to fix their issue at a speed commensurate with the new people waiting behind them.

I could take 10 or 15 minutes to get another nurse to look after my patients, quick handover of important details go out to the waiting area and offer reassurances we'll get to you as soon as we can - but in about 2 or 3 hours there's gonna be a new set of people waiting.

This is the way I think it is with Chris, long hour days (Sandi has remarked on his habit of coding late into the night), pushing pushing pushing and not noticing the time pass with all of us in the waiting area getting impatient frustrated and even angry. He has the best of intentions and it is important to him to maintain his integrity with the community and do his 'duty'. In his mind I'm sure he feels if he just keeps going it will be soon that he can reveal all and silence the detractors, his head always full of the details and problems at hand...

...but that clock just keeps on ticking and more and more new people are coming in soaking up the sour mood in the waiting area. Clever guys, 'influencers with experience' know you only have to plant a couple of noisy complainers in the waiting area and that sour mood spreads like wildfire.

I remember we had interesting discussions about the plans for the game - Death of a Spaceman for example. Different worlds and biomes shown off by CIG, the stuff shown off in the Subscriber Vault now dismissed (by CIG staff) as merely 'concept art'. It's not an accident that one of the few polls by CIG overwhelmingly showed the majority of backers wanted to be explorers, because we spent all our time pawing over images of 'other worlds' prior to 2016 and all we had to fly in was Arena Commander. In the days when CIG had less than a 100th of the money they paid concept artists to make that stuff in the vault. Why? Why was that a priority? It was made when all there was was the Squadron 42 universe to come, but no-one can post discussion of any of it, or ask why the radio silence on it, because they'll get pounced on and thread-locked by those with the perma-negative jaded attitude and told it's old and abandoned - no it isn't - the story for Squadron 42 hasn't changed only expanded.

Common sense tells you the story of Squadron 42 Ep 1, including all the locations in it, was written in stone by the end of 2015 when the mocap at the Imaginarium studios was wrapped. If they had main actors coming back for story change mocap WE'D KNOW ABOUT IT. ..and yet those who insist Chris is "The scope-creep king" mad on making a playable detailed movie is going to throw out large sections of all that expensive mocap and dialogue? Utter nonsense.

I remember there was good humoured banter, particularly when the Concierge section of the forums opened.

I remember how it was people in the community who insisted that money raised from selling ships and game packages should only go to making the game and CIG should offer a voluntary subscription for producing informative shows like Wingmans Hangar etc. Which they did. Of course that lead to a lot of discussion about subscriber perks.

There was always new information to discuss and mull over and it never occurred to anyone that large portions of the game development would be behind a spoiler wall one day - that came around late 2016 / 2017 and I think that is the cause of a lot of peoples frustrations because the dreaming part was now essentially over a community of majority dreamer explorers corralled in one star system for years which they can't even dream themselves out of anymore, from then on it was merely patch watching and tool-splaining - it's what feeds the content hungry Youtubers 'Star Citizen News!' on a regular basis. Our promised universe shrunk to Stanton with a bit of Pyro and Nyx occasionally, and Odin in a blink and you'll miss it fashion. They used to talk about other star systems all the time, they showed Leir III at CitizenCon and never spoke of it again. The very first player traversable landing zone they showed was Terra Prime.

Squadron 42 IS the bulk of the Star Citizen universe and the rather silly notion that some have fixed in their minds that this epic space war saga will be set in one or two star systems is simply incredulous, there would be uproar if that were the case and very well Chris knows it. He's on record saying the Squadron 42 story was expanded (from the original Kickstarter pitch) prior to 2015 and we know that is the case because the Odin system was a $4 Million dollar stretch goal 'extra system' long after the Kickstarter and he actually says in the directors commentary that the vertical slice is a side mission (an addition) not part of the main story arc - but it's no wonder, because CIG brought the curtain down... no more 'peeking under Chris Roberts skirt'.

Going dead silent on Squadron 42 is in my estimation THE biggest mistake they have made it was Chris' arbitrary decision to go silent on Squadron 42 related content that killed discussion of exploration and you only have to look at the forum today to see it, it completely broke the faith in an open dialogue between CIG and the community for many veterans of the project, it absolutely doesn't 'treat us like producers' in any fashion. If Todd Howard can tell everyone who hasn't paid a penny for it to be developed how many star systems are in Starfield without it being a spoiler then I'm sure the one's who paid to have Squadron 42 made have an unassailable right to ask - How big is this Squadron 42 universe that has taken 10 years to make? They were quite happy giving teaser plot spoilers before 2017 (even if only for side missions) but basic metrics? We know the Vanduul War starts with the attack on Vega, we know we start as a rookie pilot and the only UEE Naval Flight Academy is in the Kilian system - it wouldn't be a shock to acknowledge they at least are in Squadron 42, what part of the plot would he be giving away that we don't already know? Do people honestly believe they've paid a linguist to create alien languages for worlds we'll never visit?

I find it disappointing that Chris has got so deep into the weeds he's forgotten what this community is yearning for, surely it can't be beyond him to find ways to fire that imagination again without giving plot spoilers?

What I don't remember prior to Spectrum is numerous troll threads sort-by-new snow-storming of the general section, brigading and clannish behaviour, weekends and holidays full of pure shit stirring. We can't discuss reasonable questions,let alone some good old fun theory crafting, because they just get derailed and trolled so most stopped trying - which frankly was the intent of the trolls. Moderation was rare and done voluntarily, with sensitivity, even on weekends and holidays! There was certainly favouritism shown by senior producers of CIG media content but when we pointed it out it stopped - you'll notice that when a question is read out now the name/handle of the person putting the question isn't read out - it used to be.

Here's the irony, some of the biggest movers and shakers in the early backer community (the original dreamers) who were on average 29 times more likely to get their questions answered by Wingmans Hangar and 10FTC (we did the research and the maths) are now the biggest detractors organising the trolling of the project, and they are not fools, they organise well, they recruit very well and they know how to get a message across. Sandi Roberts called them 'snowflakes' on an episode of Astropub... and they were, they expected to be able to email company directors directly and even turn up at the offices unannounced. They're not gone, they just use alt accounts. What looks like a lot of upvotes for 'subject-less' negativity only appears so. They have no intention of getting answers, they never ask the right questions. They've made their minds up and now they just want to sour the milk for everyone else.

That's not to say there aren't those who are bona fide unhappy with the length of time it is taking or about decisions CIG have taken, there are plenty. I'm not happy about them abandoning the core tenets of Death of a Spaceman or their change in attitude to communicating with the community post 2016, but those who feel that way tend to just quietly go away in the main. We've lost a lot of good characters who spent time in the forums helping others get up to speed with wit and humour and the new folks coming along have lost access to a lot of good historical knowledge about the project in a broad overview 'original intent of the project' fashion because of it... again that was intentional, and in my view it's the second mistake CIG have made.. allowing the community to be manipulated like that by a small group of disgruntled disaffected "snowflakes".

You have to draw the line somewhere, hand-made bespoke everything would take far too long - it's not feasible.

The lore of the Rest and Relax franchise is that they make modular stations 'on the cheap' so the OP is right, R&R edged out the competition in the UEE.

There will be other style stations, the Pyro stations will be different to the Stanton system and of course we have the non-UEE alien systems to come.

Extrapolating from the current Stanton system, which isn't even complete yet the Aaron Halo stations look totally different, is not going to give you the rest of the verse. While they'll keep the modularity they'll have style guides for other franchises, Stanton is just the first and they've filled it with what is quickest to make it functional.

People think that what we see currently is all there is, I know this isn't true, they've done work that is behind locked 'spoiler' doors - they've been doing it for years. We only get to see and experience a fraction of what they've made.

It strains my credulity that there are those who think, and even insist, that all the events of the Squadron 42 Ep 1 space saga happen in the Odin system - Seriously? Who on Earth would tolerate that after a decade of work on it? Can you imagine the uproar if it were so, a whole space war saga set in only one star system! Common sense tells us that absolutely cannot be the case.

We know the Squadron 42 Ep 1 story was expanded prior to 2015 because:
1. Chris said it was expanded.
2. The Odin system was an addon system for the $4 Million stretch goal so it can't have been part of the original Squadron 42 story arc pitch. Chris actually says in the Squadron 42 vertical slice with directors commentary that the events in the Odin system are a side mission, not part of the main story arc.

The whole Ep 1 story is about the Vanduul invasion of Vega - we are absolutely going to the Vega system. In the first post-kickstarter video showing events from Squadron 42 Captain McClaren speaks to the camera (the player) and says "I see you've applied to the flight academy again". The UEE Naval Flight Academy is in the Kilian system and we know from the vertical slice that we start as a rookie pilot. In the vertical slice video with directors commentary it shows the Stanton arriving in the Odin system and Chris says the events in the Odin system are about 1/3rd of the way into Squadron 42 Ep 1. It also takes place before the Vanduul attack on Vega.

Ha ha.. OK I'll bite.

Well to be fair we did give the USA computers, telephony, radar and the jet engine design - we also gave them a lot of British scientists who went off to join NASA (back here they called it 'the brain drain').. but ho hum.

Will Star Citizen spend most of it's time in the repair shop? First it has to get out of the factory where it is being built and as I said the more prestigious the design the longer it takes.

Players will log into the Replication Layer Gateway Service (see diagram) all commands and actions taken by players will then be passed from the RLGS to each DGS (the purple round smudges) where a virtual copy of your game physicalised avatar will be represented as responding to those command inputs - it's a replication of the simulation. You can clearly see from the diagram no player directly connects to a DGS (the purple thing labelled 'Server Node'), DGS's ONLY connect to the Replication Layer.

When they talk about Server Meshing they are really talking about two separate components - one is player/entity authority handover and the other is controlling which parts of the game universe are loaded onto a DGS in a shard... both of these will eventually be run from the RLGS but they are starting with the player handover as they described in that ISC.

The RLGS also simultaneously informs the Persistence Layer of change states caused by both players and backend services.

Spinning up DGS's are controlled by the RLGS and told which parts of the game they are to spin up - information from the Persistence Layer comes through the RLGS to inform spinning up DGS's what state they should be in. Thus you have synchronised continuity not just of player actions but of all events in the game universe

The always running Replication Layer has authority over all entities in the game universe shard, including players, the DGS's are 'meshed' through the Replication Layer that controls them, there is no duplication of locations within a shard. Is it all very complex? Yes they said it was complex in the ISC discussing it.

The way you seem to think that server meshing involves all DGS's talking to each other would be a massive waste of bandwidth because each DGS on a shard would be duplicating unnecessary information to all other DGS's.

You heard them say they are separating out the Replication Layer from the DGS's.. what more is there to say?

2. The system in it's final state will not have loading screens, that is temporary.

3. No extra load, players are logged into that system wherever they are.

4. This shows you do not understand the final plan or understand fully what the Replication Layer Gateway Service is. The star systems are all loaded in the simulation running through the RLGS, which communicates with the persistence layer to synchronise all events in the game no matter where they are in a shard... even when DGS's are shut down.

I forgot to explain why it is not server meshing they plan to implement with Pyro.

When you log in to the game and go to the menu you are in a lobby which has verified your account and assets. The Jump Gate tunnel won't run on a DGS it will only run on your local game client. While you are in the tunnel you log out of your starting star system DGS back to the player authentication service and when you reach a certain part of the tunnel you'll be logged back into your destination star system DGS - the tunnel is a client side loading screen.

...and I say you are in the wrong place if you have that mindset.

You have come to the Rolls Royce showroom and demanded a Rolls Royce made to the same specifications, in the same time frame with a delivery date acceptable to you and for the same budget as a Toyota Micra.

I would say... if you want a Toyota Micra, go to the Toyota showroom.

You only think you represent the majority - you don't. You want the benefits of a crowdfunded 'no middle men' game, but you don't want the inconvenience that such a game project naturally incurs.


The lore of the game and the Stanton system in particular is that Port Olisar is a major cargo/trading hub with a significant security presence in the system. Clearly the current PO doesn't fulfill either of those roles.

When asked what they would do with the current Port Olisar the only answer they gave was that it would get a fitting end and would remain in some form - I'm guessing probably as a derelict like Gundo(?) above Daymar.

Some of these claims are based on a misrepresentation - you only have to go to a planetary landing zone once per wipe, after you leave it is the players choice to go back. Don't like trams, trains or the like? Don't go back there.

Once the game is finalised to the point there are no more wipes and we have full persistence a person may only visit a planetary landing zone once in their game lifetime.

What is 'scope' in game development terms? Limitation, the sort of limits imposed by the money men.

If you prefer those limits to be in place all well and good, this, frankly isn't the game project for you. You can't pick and choose the bits you do and don't like, it comes as a package.

I haven't missed the point, you are arguing from the point of a fixed proposition, that of 'standard game design'... I'm telling you clearly this community didn't want 'standard' so any pre-conceived ideas based upon that standard are irrelevant.

It's a block by block game, some blocks are in some are not. many of the limiting features we have in the alpha are because of the limitations of the CryEngine game engine. The argument about '10 years' is not relevant when you are dealing with an unknown.

When the project was first pitched there was a very definite idea of what it would be, including the limitations of the then CryEngine 3 it was based upon. Chris knew certain elements of that game engine - namely 64bit precision - could be modified to achieve his stated goals, however when the community was demanding the BDSSE, and more importantly providing the will and funding to expand beyond that early vision there was a choice, stick to the planned timeline and budget (what would he do with the extra?) or use the the money he never expected and the will of the community to go beyond that original vision. He did ask what we wanted and the community overwhelming said to 'go go go!'.

Any adult realist knows that when you ask for the moon you need a big budget and a long time to achieve that goal. This is not 'standard development' because the majority in the community didn't want standard development - it is an experiment in iterative live game design.

We have been able to play in this alpha sandbox since December 23rd 2015 and it has been expanded upon regularly without cease since then, and unlike other games where you have to pay for expansion after expansion we as a community said we would provide the means for the 'never ending expansion' with CIG's assistance.

There are those who make snide comments that our grandchildren will play this game - as though there is nothing to play today - BUT THAT IS EXACTLY THE POINT! We didn't want a limited game to play for a few months and move on to the next bubblegum release, we wanted something that would last and expand. That change in approach has certain requirements that other game projects don't have, patience being the main one. If someone has joined the project not understanding that, and consequently suffering buyers remorse, it is up to them to use the system as provided to exit, which they could easily do - at a substantial profit I might add, which CIG are perfectly fine with since they provided the means to do it.

I watched Chris Roberts presentation at GamesCon in 2012, I watched for another year before deciding to support the project in a way I'd never support any other game project precisely because of that powerful community/developer partnership where gamers don't have to accept the limitations and deadlines imposed by the 'the suits' whose only interest is in making a profit from gamers. This project will remain 'in development' as long as there is a community with a will to enable it, and frankly it has been the most successful model of a game development partnership there has ever been.

Is it 'finished'? Certainly not, hell no! That is not a bad thing, it is THE difference that the majority who understood what the project was all about were looking for... and we have it in spades - No limits!

What is the point of Star Citizen? It is to prove that when you remove the money men with their self interest and instead work in partnership between gamers and a game developer amazing things become possible, things no-one else would even attempt. There is no way to quantify how long the impossible will take, which is why both the community and CIG know that, again unlike other games made in secret, we get to enjoy not only the game but our part in the design of that game and watch it grow. We get to say like no other game project - I was there man! I was a part of what made all this possible!

It's called 'a pipeline' because at various stages many developers work on a feature according to their schedule agreed and prioritised by managers with an overall view of the project and how those features fit together. Just because 2 appear to be working on it now that doesn't mean that's all the team members who will feed into that feature. Some team members are specialists, some are generalists.

The inventory system as it is now is a placeholder, it is planned that everything will be physicalised. No 'magic bags of holding' as Chris calls it.

The same is true of the white beacon suit and explorer helmet, it is a placeholder. It's temporary and they will likely not have a free suit/helmet on respawn.

Having watched the video I see that you have misunderstood what they said.

You will be trespassing immediately on entering private property, there is no timer, they mentioned "if you step off the ship a few seconds later" only to say that if you leave the private property that trespasser status will be removed.

While you are trespassing a player who owns the property or their invited party members can legally shoot you at any time.

Extremely unlikely, current generation of consoles wouldn't have the grunt to support it and the control set is too complex.

I have posited the notion that they may have module releases for Arena Commander on console. The company they gave ToW to develop mostly did work for Sony Entertainment Division.

It seems like make work for the sake of it. I'd rather have a variety of ships to choose from. You know what people are going to do with this thing, you saw them even on the video make a monstrosity of a top heavy cargo lifter, it just doesn't look realistic.

What they refer to as 'cutscenes' are not cutscenes in the traditional sense, they are game loaded action sequences with dialogue you still have control of your character during them. You can break away from them.

Key story information comes from video sequences which are displayed on screens in the game... diagetic as Jared likes to call it.

No it isn't one long movie.

The issue 
 
 with the progress tracker is that bug fixing and playtesting features also appears as assigned work on those features or chapters.

I believe this intended obscuration on the part of CIG. It's done when it's done is the best we'll get but in fairness no-one can quantify bug fixing, it takes as long as it takes. I bet the managers do quite a lot of head scratching about what to put in reports and the progress tracker so as not to give the game away.

The truth some are happy with the limitations and never really grasped that this project was all about removing those limitations. In another of my posts on the many threads about this topic I listed around 10 things Starfield won't have. It wasn't an exhaustive list.

The reason Starfield doesn't have atmospheric flight, you'll notice all external shots for landing and taking off is because the Creation Engine uses cell technology just like Skyrim. Yes they have introduced new procedural generation of assets to fill those cells, but it's still cell technology. I know because I've used the Skyrim Creation Kit.

What are you basing that on exactly?

The friends and org lists they have already said they will place on the same shard unless the player requests otherwise? Benoit Bausejor already outlined this at his Citizen on presentation on the plan for meshed server shards

How exactly do you think they can arrange player held events and race days already?

ROFL..

Like hair that flows and moves when you move or in the wind?
Like a unified 1st and 3rd person character rig?
Like physicalised cargo boxes with contents inside?
Like the ability to manually fit and remove ship modules?
Like ships and other physical structures that can bend and distort?
Like fire propagation?
Like.. no loading screens?
Like fully simulated water body physics?
Like healing gameplay that goes from hospitals through to med-guns?
Like multicrew?
Like mining with different ships, swappable components and modules as well as handheld and wheeled vehicles, with refining aboard ships and stations?


The list could go on, and on, but I'm sure these are enough to ponder.

Haven't you heard? The Star Map is being reworked.

Noticed a few things:
No EVA
No piloting to space.
No view of pilot landing via controls.
No physicalised cargo.
No ship in ship.
No ship to ship refueling.
No permanent damage to anything but destroyed ships.
Not a single strand of hair moved.
No healing / medical gameplay.

The PU is an alpha build WIP, it can't take the content of either Squadron 42 or Arena Commander right now. They can't just dump in content to a partially built WIP. There is a plan, it's a good one, pretty groundbreaking and they are working through that plan right now. Each part of the plan has it's part in the overall plan, Arena Commander is just one part of the plan, it's feature that will be in Squadron 42.

Loading screen to go from atmosphere to space is unlikely to be modded out very soon. There will be a loading screen for interplanetary POI to POI travel.

When assessing the depth of gameplay it's worth remembering that Todd Howard said they considered having refueling as a mechanic but decided against it, your ships will have infinite fuel. No Starfarers then.

It's almost certain it will have mining and crafting... but it'll be basic.

I am looking forward to seeing it and playing it, but there is not much comparison between Star Citizen and Starfield.

This.. quite frankly.. annoys me. What exactly do you think needs some special attention to come to the PU? Planets, with biomes atmospheres and physics that control the behaviour of things in them? No. They're using the exact same tools. Flora and fauna? No. They're using exactly the same tools. Game controls? No. They are using exactly the same tools. Animations? No. It's exactly the same tools.

The only special requirements the PU has is to connect to backend services that allow persistence and multiplayer... that's it... nothing else that you can touch, see, hear, or use is any different.. But you go on on making broad sweeping bland statements if it suits you.

All the backend services like NPC Scheduler, Mission Manager, Quantum and Quasar the Replication Layer and Persistence Layer are designed to plug into any level designed location. If your head is stuck in the idea that NPC's have to have scripts written to know where doors, walls and usables are you're out of date and not keeping up.

This is the problem, those who haven't the first clue, because long explanatory posts (either from the community or CIG) don't interest them and they have zero interest in researching the issues in game development as a whole yet they think they can tell CIG and us where the problems lie.

Name one.. just one thing in Squadron 42 that you think needs some major rework or change to bring it to the PU they have planned... just one.

Believe me I didn't expect everyone to read it and it's clear from replies that many haven't. My aim was to present the opposing side of the argument (CIG's side mainly) and the projects history so that those who wish to can put it all into context.

Chris has said on camera he has sympathy with those who say they backed the 2016 version of the game, but collectively this community and CIG gave themselves the opportunity to do far better, it's likely the majority would prefer that than a game with a short shelf life. The 2016 version would have been very similar to what is planned for Starfield - not bad, but not what the community was asking for when they all mostly asked for the Best Damn Space Simulator Ever. If we had learned he had the means and opportunity to do better and didn't take it the backlash would have been loud and noisy.

Those who have that mindset aren't in here demanding en mass that CIG take out features that only became possible because of that change in approach are they?

Mixing the 'it's taking too long' argument and expressions of frustration of 'Squadron 42 a waste of resources' is a non-sequitur. No-one knows how long a project like this should take, not even CIG, because it has never been done before. Do we all wish it to come sooner? Of course, even me, but we have to be realistic. This is not a known quantity (established developer using established tools) making a standard game and there are much less ambitious games that have taken as long with more spent on their development. Comparing to other games is pointless, there is nothing out there like it and no-one else is developing the tools to make anything like it possible, and as far as I'm aware there isn't even anything like it planned by any other developer in the future.

I'll give you an example, Outera - the group that made this 'whole planet simulation' did make the planet but this is merely mildly interesting to volume game developers because it was all hand made far too expensive in dev time and resources, they didn't develop tools junior developers could use to make spherical grid planets in volume. The thing that has taken the time for this project was making those unique tools that can be used time and time again to produce content at a faster and faster rate by people with much less development R&D experience. If you watch the ISC from 4 weeks ago about the Montreal Sandbox Team making derelict outposts you'll hear him say, they could take some team members off the team for other work because the tools had progressed so they could produce more, with less, faster. That is the aim of the project, a new way to make games, not just build games to a standard (limited) formula.

Everything that benefits the project as a whole goes on to extend the franchise, they don't have to remake everything for Episode 2 and 3. In effect they are building the base universe for as many stories as they want to tell in the future. How long has the Star Wars and Star Trek universes been built upon?

Once again... the capability of the current Alpha is not in a place to take all the Squadron 42 content, systems engineers and network engineers don't make planets, trees, rivers, AI. If you'd rather wait until they finish their part before even starting game universe content, then imagine how much longer the PU would take.

No he didn't you've got the cart before the horse again. The PU is a dependency of the Squadron 42 universe, it's where you go to retire after your military service, the same game universe you were a navy pilot in with added multiplayer capability and backend services.

I did say that the plan changed and why.

The millions of backers have added content to the game universe via their requests but the fundamental structure has not changed, all the backend services are being designed to plug as standalone additions to that game universe. There won't be any huge refactor of the Squadron 42 universe required as some seem to think, there will be some 'bring the universe up to date' art assets - the history wall at the Hurston Corporation for example which currently has no history of the Vanduul War on it. The game universe you retire to after your military campaign service is virtually identical to the game universe you will play Star Citizen in.

There are 3 timelines running:
The pre-Vanduul War timeline which is the current Alpha.
The Vanduul War timeline for your military service
The post military service timeline.

You can make as many assertions as you like but if you have no logic to back it up it's merely opinion based upon an erroneous assumption.

To state it clearly again.. the current Alpha PU is not capable of holding all the Squadron 42 content and it won't be until all those backend services are put into place - none of that is affected by how many players there are or what their demands are. The Alpha is a test-bed for multiplayer capability, it doesn't dictate the content of the game universe beyond that. There is only ONE game universe.

Seems you are fast on your way to equaling or surpassing your PP record.

There's a piece or two of logic you've missed.

Being a pilot, especially a combat pilot, at the skill level it will require will not be for all, certainly with the expense and meta of fancy-dancey flight controls. You're ruling out a whole class of gamers who would have no interest in piloting a ship, but might have an interest in ways to make their way through this game experience - specifically role players.

There is also the notion that ships will be as plentiful and easy to get and run as they are now, this won't be the case. Chris has said, ships will be for the 1%, the majority won't have them. If you don't have one, or want one, or the expense of running one, to fly yourself then a means of gainful employment is an option, turret gunner is just one of those options... it's a free seat to get where you might want to go. You assume the options in the RSI store will be the same as they are now with ships attached to game packages, it has to be that way now because 'gainful employment' options are in poor supply currently, it's likely it won't stay that way. Many have asked for non-ship related activities to make UEC.

Mirai Fury fighter jocks would have chosen a combat ship anyway, they aren't the ones options like turret gunner would appeal to.

You're thinking far too narrowly about what the future play possibilities are of this game project. That's what the Picard Palms are all about. This game is meant to appeal to groups and individuals on a large scale, where people have varying skills and preferences, different goals to achieve. If you're itching to do zero to hero, paid turret gunner is an option, just one of many to come.

But you do want to play in the same game universe.

The current PU can't hold that game universe, so stopping work on Squadron 42 won't help and it's is an error to think that those making content for Squadron 42 aren't also making content for Star Citizen, they are making it for both.

Backend system designers and network engineers don't make ships, planets, AI, landing zone areas etc so you'd still have to wait for those systems engineers and network engineers to do their work.. then wait for stuff to be made to go into it. Stopping Squadron 42 development will not speed up Star Citizen development in any way, it's more likely it would simply lengthen the time for the expansion of that game universe.

Squadron 42 is not simply background lore for the massively open universe MMO, the story of the Vanduul War is the reason that the whole game universe exists. Squadron 42 will be your first experience of that 'Living Breathing Universe' always planned.

1. I'm a guy that likes analogies (if you want to skip this part just go to section 2: The history of the project) so I'm going to use a well known phrase / idiom to describe what the issue is here.

There is a phrase 'Putting the cart before the horse' to suggest that someone has got their logic ass-backwards. The modern take is a literal one, the horse in front of a cart and how ridiculous that looks, but that isn't how the phrase originated. In the days of horse and cart someone could go buy a cart and thus spend money, however if they hadn't bought the horse first - and all the infrastructure to support it - land to graze on, stables, staff to work in the stables, a steady supply of feed and a farrier service then you had 'Put the cart before the horse' in the estimation of your priorities. You wanted the trappings but you didn't want to invest in the means to make those trappings useful, this is of course erroneous thinking, yes you can buy the fancy cart and have it outfitted with leather trim and velvet seats with brass lamps for headlights, but what point if you have no horse to pull it? The cart exists because of the horse, not the other way around.

2. The history of the project.
Chris had an idea for an updated Freelancer / Wing Commander type game that would be set in one game universe and the 'War story' would be a campign of missions you could drop into and drop out of to go roaming around this massive open world. Because each landing zone area would be gated behind a cutscene to each landing zone or area this was possible. They also hoped and indeed told everyone that was the plan that the campaign missions would have limited multiplayer. However... It was always the case that the idea should be that each players experience would be unique to them (their character history log) and that history would continue with you into the larger 'drop out' game universe.

When the rubber hit the road after the funds arrived to flesh out this idea more it became clear that the two notions of 'unique history for player' and multiplayer experience weren't compatible - how can it be a unique challenge to you if your performance and choices were affected by other players actions?

The best way to view what the plan originally was is to think of a the real world example of a military reservist (National Guard for our friends across the pond). You drop in when called back to duty and drop out to go back home when the duty is done. It all takes place in the same 'real world'.

When the notion of a seamless, no loading screen universe became a possibility this already somewhat irksome problem of how to have a unique to each player experience presented a solution and the funds to pursue that solution became available. The plan finally changed circa 2015 but there had been some head scratching prior to that. It was decided that now the multiplayer experience promised would be in the Star Citizen universe and you play the Squadron 42 campaign alone. To solve the complaint that some wanted the pre-2016 multiplayer experience they mooted the idea of of in game 'battle camera' simulation which could be the place where you can coop the fighting sections of the Vanduul War campaign. Thus Arena Commander.

If you have read the lore regarding Arena Commander you know that Original Systems were set up to make military training simulators and that later evolved into virtual game worlds for entertainment. As you can see Arena Commander is not some afterthought dreamed up to entertain the players/backers in a limited version of the game, you are playing the thing that you'll be using in Squadron 42 to train and review / improve your battle experience and mission scores. There is precedent for this, it worked exactly the same way in Wing Commander IV: Prophecy, originally planned and designed by, but not finally made by, Chris Roberts. This is where they have mooted the idea of coop play for Squadron 42, in the post battle analysis simulator where it has zero effect on your story campiagn history log choices.

3. The future
You will still be playing a drop in / drop out version of the game except that now you drop in for a whole campaign rather than just missions. There's some game design technicality to fix here because you could actually play both simultaneously and it's the same game character you play in both, excpet they are in a different timeline - the player history log updates on a per mission basis and this will update your 'retired' character's history in the PU as your history log fills out. The two games are connected because they are the same character and the same game universe.

As you can see, Squadron 42 was and is still being designed to exist in that same single game universe, it will be as fleshed out as the main game, it just doesn't need those systems that support an MMO experience and so it makes sense to develop it as a separate branch, but make no mistake, the game universe design as planned IS Squadron 42, not the the limited Alpha PU test-bed. People talk in terms of Squadron 42 'stuff' coming to the PU after launch, understandable because this is how they describe it themselves sometimes, but this isn't strictly accurate, it would be more accurate to say that the current PU will be merged into the Squadron 42 universe to extend it's functionality.

Why is it taking so long to put Squadron 42 stuff into the PU? Until now, and still, the PU before all the backend services like Server Meshing is simply not capable of holding all that Squadron 42 stuff and capability, it's as simple as that, the limited test-bed Alpha just can't cut it for that huge amount of content. If they concentrated on Star Citizen and dropped Squadron 42 you would STILL have to wait for the capability of the PU catch up to hold it all.

The PU is the cart that the Squadron 42 horse will make relevant.

So no, you didn't just pay for Star Citizen the multiplayer, you paid to enter and create unique characters in, and have, that whole game universe.

You understand.. Squadron 42 takes place in exactly the same Star Citizen universe? Indeed it is primarily what that universe was built for?

You understand that the current PU was a later addon (2016 onward) to be used as a test-bed we could play in for that Star Citizen universe?

No? Well I guess when you sign up for an Alpha it pays to do due diligence and look at the history of the project.

Your first experience with that whole intended 'Living Breathing Universe' will be Squadron 42. The massively multiplayer part was the 'extra' that came with the project, it wasn't the main thrust of the project which was to build a massive detailed game world that ran continuously in real time 'forever' which (to the player) appeared seamless and uninterrupted.

They said that now they have a tool to make rivers they can adapt that to make roads too. Rivers and roads means bridges... won't that be a relief.. somewhere to call home eh?

I almost never CTD and my equipment is much older. Last time was last year.

Instituting temporary fixes for service side 30K's is a bit of a waste of the engineers precious time given how infrequent they are for the majority and the fact that the current server architecture / function is also temporary.

As discussed in the last ISC regarding Server Meshing, once the Replication Layer Gateway Service has gone in you won't log into the DGS's anymore and so there won't be any 'service caused' 30K's (30K's are a client / server disconnect, they can also happen if someone has a problem with their internet).

They are also working on a DGS Crash Recovery Service (it's on the Progress Tracker), that will work from / through the Replication Layer and tie into the Persistence Layer. If you are disconnected from a crashed server all you will notice is that the game becomes unresponsive for a short period before you are transferred to a recovered server, you won't go back to menu.

So the informed mantra should be - When GIB Replication Layer?!! ...they are working on it now.

* DGS = Dedicated Game Server.

Server Meshing isn't the big problem because it's known technology - Chris stated that it wouldn't be as difficult as getting the full persistence and backend systems in place, making all the new systems work together with SM is the problem.

To make it clear:

Stage One - get servers running with the game on. Each is a standalone copy of the Stanton system and the servers are directly connected to backend services, like the NPC scheduler, but there's lots of backend services. Servers had no way to save state when they spun down. This was the state of affairs up to 3.17.X.

Stage two - Design and connect the Persistence Layer which has the hard copy record of the exact state of everything in the game universe rewritten several times a second so that DGS's spinning up can restore from EntityGraph (the hard copy game save)stored data - this they call generally the Persistence Layer. In order to do this and make the servers read from the Persistence Layer and write back to it they had to create a process on each DGS which they called 'The Hybrid Service'. This is what came with 3.18 and allowed in game persistence of non-player owned items. This is done, but there are teething troubles connecting the Hybrid Service to all the backend services.

Stage Three (Build 4.0) This is the hard part - Design and implement the Replication Layer Gateway Service (RL) which will run on it's own set of servers. This will replace the Hybrid Service which can be taken off the DGS's. Players will not connect directly to DGS's after the introduction of the RL - they will connect to the RL and all information, including player input controls, will go through the RL and be simultaneously sent to both the shards / DGS's and the Persistence Layer. The DGS will report their state several times a second back through the RL to the Persistence Layer. All network traffic from backend services will also go through the RL to be sent to the shards and Persistence Layer. This is what they are doing now, while they work on Server Meshing as well, but SM can't go in until the RL is in place and functioning.

In order to understand why the Replication Layer Gateway Service is necessary you must grasp the concept of 'authority'. Every entity in the game, including players, must be controlled by 'something' which has authority over them... this is why you are kicked back to the main menu when disconnected from a server which had authority over you. The thing that is going to have authority over every entity in the game in the final plan is the Replication Layer Gateway Service. Once that is in you will no longer log into a server or shard and you won't be kicked back to menu if a server or shard connection is lost. There are other services which work to maintain the constant 'always on' game universe such as the DGS Crash Recovery Service which is coming.

The more astute among you will recognise what this is - the tunnel is a loading screen running on your local PC while you are logged into the Replication Layer Gateway Service until you are logged back in to your destination server.

As discussed in the last ISC that covered Server Meshing, before they go for full Static SM implementation they are going to put the RL in place and run Stanton and Pyro each on their own server on a shard - while in the Jump Gate tunnel the Replication Layer Gateway Service will take authority over the entities passing through the tunnel then transfer that authority back to whichever server you land on. If it works as planned you won't notice it happening, to you, you just flew the tunnel from Stanton to Pyro but you actually jumped servers.

Eventually the RL will take many more services from the DGS shards, and it will communicate between the Persistence Layer, all Shards and any backend services.

Once the Replication Layer Gateway Service has gone in, is fully functioning and tested, they can then go for stage four.

Stage Four - Implement Static Server Meshing and tie all functions of the RL through the Shard Manager Service to each DGS on a shard. Remove the temporary client side loading screen.

So you can see, the thing taking the time isn't the known technology of Server Meshing some of which functions are in the RL, it's the brand new never done before backend services mainly the Replication Layer Gateway Service that are needed to support meshed server shards.

But of course it's easier to just call it all - Server Meshing for simplicity.

They have discussed this in the early days. As pointed out above it is an objective based campaign set within an open world which is run 'in real time' (you'll notice that every time they show Squadron 42 excerpts there is always a time and location given), since you are under military orders there would be certain restrictions and there is a brig you could be sent to for insubordination - however there is off duty time, during that off duty time you'll have some freedom to do what you want to do. Your first experience of that 'Living Breathing Universe' they have always talked about will be in Squadron 42.

You will be making choices, and those choices will have effects later down the line during the whole life of your character. Everything you do is timestamped on your personal history log which is unique to you.

The 'lieutenant' problem (ie you are always referred to by your rank not your name) mentioned in the vertical slice is because you aren't playing a named character, you are playing your created character fulfilling a role. As Jared has said "Squadron 42 is basically one huge dynamic mission inside the Star Citizen universe." As we know there is no 'undo' or going back in time in Star Citizen. In the vertical slice mission, rather oddly it may seem, Old Man Colton - the senior officer on the sortie, says 'your choice' when choosing how to go about an objective.

Chris has said that they had to give careful thought to where and how they implement resets (or game save points), this is because you aren't going to be allowed to go back and check out each different available choice with the same character - they have discussed selling character slots without the full game package. So basically if you want to explore other options than those your character chooses in Squadron 42 you'll have to restart from the beginning with a new character, which you can then choose to continue for the life of that character. That's why you are permitted to purchase multiple copies of Squadron 42 in the store.

Following on from what some are mentioning as optional mission objectives I know from a conversation with Erin Roberts in 2015 and a later Q&A with Chris Roberts on SC Live that anything you do in Squadron 42 will / may have consequences not in only Squadron 42 but also in Star Citizen. Your collective possessions, training and character history go with you when you retire your Squadron 42 character to the PU. It is a continuation of the life of your Squadron 42 created character.

So... yes.. all indications are that Squadron 42 will not be an 'on rails' game - Chris has actually stated it won't be an 'on rails' game. In this respect it is somewhat like the Hitman approach - you have objectives, but how you go about those objectives is up to you.

Yes, we'll be able to hang clothing / flight suits in lockers and cupboards. No worries, it's coming.

Ship hangars are also coming to the main game when we have player owned residences... so they'll probably have some clothes hangers too.

Quite so.. Grimhex racing, or anything in the main game like it, is a different case potentially, we'll have to see.

The show was about Arena Commander modules, you can't purchase REC the way you purchase UEC. Are people under the impression you'll be gambling with UEC in Arena Commander? Why?

You can't convert REC to UEC for use in the main game.

You can't convert UEC or anything bought with UEC / Cash into REC.

Yes subscribers get REC as a bonus for subscribing, but you can't use it anywhere except in Arena Commander for items that don't persist outside of each Arena Commander match. There is no persisting benefit to anything bought with REC, which is why it's called rental equipment credits.

Arena Commander is the game simulation within the game simulation that is Star Citizen / Squadron 42.

If people want to interpret Australian / European game gambling law that way then technically any game that gives you some free-play benefit if you win / participate would also be gambling. Mass Effect has slot machine gambling for virtual credits, it isn't banned in any country under that pretext as far as I know. There are other reasons why games are banned... and Star Citizen does feature violence, criminality and drug use. It's likely it, or Squadron 42, will also feature some level of what some might consider 'adult' content with regard to human relationships.

Jared did say at the end of the second video there are AC modes still in development they aren't ready to share yet. The question for some is, has the question(s) been answered but perhaps it just isn't the answer you want? It isn't as if they are sitting on their hands doing nothing, content to keep players occupied is going in - at an increasing rate. If that is what they have in the shop window, it's not hard to see that the backroom work is likely to be even more busy.

Whatever special access or privilege people think they have, and yes it is different to the norm, this is still game development.

Ah but if only they could! Unfortunately the DNA and FOIP requires far more facial bones than usual, well FOIP did once they whipped it into shape to fit all those new bones.. dang it!

Good thing though.. DNA does allow facial asymmetry which is hella-rare! That finicky old 'attachment problem' butt had to be kicked first to get that working - thanks Evo! Drag the jaw you also have to resize the gum and teeth part otherwise it's somewhat unsightly, dem facial anim's can go a bit wonky.

Someone correct me if I'm wrong but didn't they say they were up to 24 layers for the overlays? Yikes! 24!

That is insured for it's monetary value, the owner knows they'd never get an exact replacement of the Mona Lisa on loss which is what the OP is suggesting. 
 


If it is a replaceable item, by whatever means a copy is made, and not a unique one-off (as I said), then sure.. replace it. If EVERYTHING was copy-able it ipso facto means there will be NO truly unique items, I don't think that would be good and we know they plan to have unique one-off items in the game because they said so. There are lots of faked Hadesian artifacts out there sold by scammers - read the lore, but only the original ones from Hades will unlock the secret of Hades which can only ever happen once. It's a puzzle piece chase, only the original set will solve the puzzle, pointless if they can be exactly copied.

I have an Hadesian artifact as part of my game package, I will not know if it is an original unless I undertake the mission(s) to go find out... and it might be one of the fakes. It's a lottery.

This isn't Elite Dangerous. There is no full persistence, death of a spaceman in Elite Dangerous.

There's what we have been shown of the Odin system and we know they have worked on Nyx because after Delamar's removal from Stanton they put in a medical clinic and told us.. so that's 4.

1. If you go to the Star Map and check the routes you'll see that there are other systems you have to go through to get from Stanton / Pyro to Odin, in total around 12+ have some connection to either PU systems or Squadron 42 systems.

2. The very first landing zone ever shown off was Prime on Terra III, again look at the Star Map. I was told face to face that the Terra Nova system was originally planned as the first system for the PU but it was changed. This was at a time when 'Squadron 42 had to be the priority'. Why was the Terra system being chosen? No point in adding extra work, might as well use a system you know is for Squadron 42 anyway.

3. If you look at the subscriber vault images for concepts of star systems, check the names and locations on the Star Map they do indeed mostly follow the pattern I mentioned at 1. Also, most lore initially and currently being fleshed out is linked to those star systems.

4. Look at the progress tracker and read the monthly reports, there are features in active development that have no / little use case in the star systems we know about.

5. They keep featuring in-game locations, with features and capabilities not currently in the game, in extended 'promo' videos when there isn't any need to go to that level of work simply to sell a ship. Those who think it is just advertising don't seem to have any idea of the level of work that would be involved to make those environments. Akem's Razer - is it more likely they'll use existing assets for promo's or are they more likely to allocate resources to make unnecessarily elaborate whole new throwaway 3D environments, with narrative, just to show off a ship that appears for a few seconds at the end of a video?

6. They put Arena Commander racing at Aydo on Green in the Ellis system - there's a ton of lore about it, Murray Cup Racing was a big subject in the early days of the project when everything was about Squadron 42 and it being a 'drop in / drop out campaign', it was the reason for the racing class of ships AND the Galactic Gear series - and what do you know, after Sean Tracy said it was easier to put a whole planet into Arena Commander for a single FPS mission (The Good Doctor - set in the Leir system featured in the Sandworm playthrough demo), we just now are expecting Green in the Ellis system to come to AC in 3.19 and it's timed to occur along with a change of price for Squadron 42.

There's one thing we know about CIG, because they keep telling us, it's that they don't start work on something (or continue it after a change of priorities) before they think they need to - the take from that is that all current work across all departments relates to either the storyline for Squadron 42 - the first Vanduul attack is in Vega so basically that's set in stone, it has to be there - or intervening star systems to connect them to the PU. Jared Huckaby said on camera "Squadron 42 is basically one giant dynamic mission set in the the PU". Again check the Star Map, look at routes from Vega to any star systems known to be WIP - in Squadron 42 there are no time jumps that teleport you from one unconnected system to another, you will be going through all connected systems to get where you are going.

We were also told the vertical slice demo mission was a side mission in the campaign, according to Chris in the directors commentary, it's about 1/3rd the way through the full campaign. My take on it is that is part of an expanded origin / backstory of our character that was added after the main campaign was decided upon. My reasoning for this was that the Odin system was a very early funding stretch goal to add 10 more star systems to the verse - around 2 years after the main Squadron 42 campaign was planned. Chris has said on camera that the Squadron 42 campaign story was expanded. As far as CIG are concerned the Odin system was already known to us precisely because it was one of the stretch goal systems mentioned, so it's perfect for a non-spoiler reveal - give them one they already know about that isn't part of the main Vanduul War campaign.

Anyone who suggests that Squadron 42 will only feature Vega and the Odin system are so deep into a narrow focused skepticism that they have lost any sense of reasonable proportion they are simultaneously sticking their fingers in their ears singing la la la while burying their head in the sand and pissing into the wind, there are over 30 chapters and each has several branching missions. Very large amounts of the game lore relating to Squadron 42 are attached to the UEE based on Earth - one of the early stretch goals was to add a 4th landing zone to Earth you don't need landing zones on Earth if the Admiral Bishop speech to the Senate is just some video to show what's happening in the story, the UEE naval military based in Kilian (we know we start as a rookie pilot in training, the only place to do that training is in Kilian, it's what Fleet Week recruiting is all about) and the Terra system.

There is one question guaranteed to make a dev on camera go quiet.. then timidly ask.. do you mean of the ones we're allowed to talk about? It's notable that Jared even asks them the question 'Where's your favourite place in the game?'. I know they are just itching to tell us, Jared's always trying to get us clues. I've met them in person and it's the same. We know all about Stanton, Pyro, Odin and Nyx from videos, monthly reports and the progress tracker - so where are these places they don't want to talk about, can't even mention the name of? If they are even considering it as a 'favourite location' they must have been there to see it, and it must be in a state that impresses even them.

When they built / outfitted their new offices in LA and Manchester they used concept art for a wall mural of Prime on Terra III (the 3D model we've all seen was of Prime) at the LA office and they used an etched glass door with a line plan outline of the Super Dreadnought for their meeting room at Foundry 42 UK in Wilmslow, the main office where most of the Squadron 42 work was being done. There are 3 lines of known Squadron 42 lore and in engine footage that say Kilian absolutely will be in Squadron 42. Some of the very first in engine footage was of the naval shipyard in Kilian where that Super Dreadnought is being built, it is an integral part of the Squadron 42 story, it is Admiral Bishop's pet project. When that footage capture of the shipyard was shown, everyone was very pleased to see it, but no-one was surprised by it because at that time the PU wasn't even thought of and EVERYTHING was related to Squadron 42, absolutely everything.

We know Squadron 42 will have fully realised planetary systems that you can roam about in because that was always the plan - to be able to drop in and drop out of the campaign, that was 'the verse' they always referred to textured balls in space with landing zones you reached by cutscene - that notion didn't change until the PU became a fully realised thing in 2017 that took away the need for enclosed landing zones. Jump Gates between systems was part of that earliest plan.

The PU didn't even exist as an idea prior to Brian Chambers opening the Frankfurt office and researching procedural planet creation tech AND the subsequent work by Evo Herzeg to be able to apply physics to those spherical grid planetary bodies so that we could touch them, we had the social module Area 18, the hangar module which was connected to the social module and AC to play in, it was planned to stay that way until Squadron 42 released, it was never mentioned prior to late 2015 after the Squadron 42 mocap shoot was completed (that mocap shoot necessarily includes every location in the Squadron 42 campaign where there is a landing zone or playable asset located) and after we had seen the 'Morrow Tour' of the Stanton video which was the expanded Squadron 42 story line. Nothing of the original Squadron 42 campaign was changed, that means all the story, characters and locations haven't changed.

The Live PU and all the technology to support it was the addon to the project after 2015 because the community was getting thoroughly bored of Arena Commander and the extremely limited social module yet still the community was raising far more money than Chris ever expected to get. If we discount 64bit precision and other work for Squadron 42, the PU as now planned was only started in late 2016.

It wasn't procedural planet tech that opened the gate to the Stanton system it was the completion of 64bit precision that allowed a massive play space and all they had to put in it was an asteroid base, Delamar / Levski, a very small planetoid, and some space stations until procedural planet tech gave us moons and planets to land on well over a year later in late 2017. They didn't even put in the ArcCorp Area 18 landing zone which we were all running around through the hangar/social module. Everything that went into that first version of Stanton was originally made for Squadron 42, they were the only assets ready for player use that fit and didn't involve massive spoilers or discarded systems like the auto-pilot ATC cutscenes. The first version of the Stanton system was a hastily cooked up rushed job to give the backers somewhere to go that felt like real space. I know Levski was originally made as an FPS level landing zone (hence being put in a crater you weren't supposed to be able to get out of) because in March 2016 I visited F42 UK and the guy who made Levski told me so. He didn't say it in a whisper as if confiding some deep dark secret, he said it matter-of-factly as if it was bloody obvious - which of course - it is. We all knew Delamar was supposed to be in the Nyx system.

The problem is a Windows system one, not a CIG developer one. Have you ever used an image editor that gives you a warning that says.. 'You've left a large amount of data in system memory would you like to save that data?'

Very large files are not held by Windows in RAM if they are not frequently/currently being accessed, they are shifted to the pagefile for fast retrieval for the less frequently accessed files. There is constant error checking of RAM by Windows, there is no error checking of the pagefile. Windows will do this no matter how much RAM you have installed because the Windows Operating System is a 'one size fits all' beast, unless you create a RAM-disk with all that extra installed RAM and allocate the pagefile to that, which is of course a definitely risky thing to do. Let's not even get into the fact that many are not fully conversant with how Windows operates and don't bother to shut down programs running in the background which could randomly fill RAM while the game is running - Google Chrome for example. Windows 10 or 11 system can randomly fire up process that will use 8 - 12GB of RAM, that's part of the reason for Windows game mode.

The advantage is that anything controlled by occlusion culling, off screen culling and Object Container Streaming etc doesn't have to be permanently loaded into RAM to avoid a stutter-fest.

We in the community, not CIG, advise people to increase their pagefile and place it on their fastest drive to reduce stuttering / game pauses and long load times while assets load because if you rely on Windows to dynamically manage the pagefile size you could run out of disk space for the pagefile mid-game especially if you have lots of background processes running and you are using the OS drive as the game storage drive. Those with 'small' VRAM will also have the RAM and thus it's impact on the pagefile to offset deficiency in VRAM.

Star Citizen uses very large files which have to be decompressed into RAM from the .pak file on load, significantly larger than most games. That's why other spaceship games don't have detailed ship interiors or very detailed exteriors (without loading screens), even the smallest ships in Star Citizen have way more complex 3D models (read bigger file size in RAM) and detailed exteriors than other games.

So... you can have way larger game download size if they don't compress the game data, smaller file size less detailed models in the game with less detailed surfaces and fewer LOD's, a smaller play space volume with much smaller draw distances, with loading screens or on-screen 'popping in' of game assets...

...or in a game designed to run on the most popular operating system in the World on machines with varying capabilities you can do what Windows does natively and just use the pagefile to do exactly what it is designed to do very efficiently - in ideal circumstances - for the majority.

Or, you could assign an engineering team to research and design a game that changes the way Windows manages RAM, that complies with Microsofts game licensing rules, for the very few who can afford beasty expensive gaming rigs, a system those with less capable machines probably wouldn't be able to use.

Even the 'creative types' know these basic facts about how the Windows OS works.

Edit: Programs like Photoshop are not just image editors, they also compress images for smaller file size, if they didn't the raw image data would be huge for each file, it's generally the uncompressed raw image data that is loaded into RAM or VRAM (unless you've got one of those top of the line very modern GPU's that can handle compressed images). Star Citizen also uses image compression for it's 3D model overlays and that's why you have to have the shader cache. Your CPU/RAM puts the 3D model into the virtual space, your GPU/VRAM puts the image skin on that 3D model so that you can see it.

They addressed this issue. Size is not the problem (except that ships that size need a larger team and take more time), the main problem is that the BMM is unique (Jared's favourite word 'Bespoke'), it has no shared assets with any other ship so if they dedicated a team to a capship of that size then any ships that could share resources/parts would have less dev resources if the team was tied up with the BMM. They summed it up by saying, one BMM or 5 other ships produced with shared assets for the same amount of dev resources in the time.

It's worth noting that the BMM was concepted at a time when few ship manufacturers had more than 1 or 2 ships in their inventory and before ship system modules were a thing to take account of.

They explained about problems regarding this with the Retaliator modules (the original question being answered was 'what is happening to modular ship design'?), until not that long ago they couldn't get the control set from the cockpit to activate anything on attached modules because they are separate from the main hull entities (with the Hull C, D and E the engine drive section are separate entities).. but that's been fixed now.

The Retaliator also needed a rework (done apparently) because the torpedo arms were part of the main hull structure - they also resized doors and corridors to allow ship system module fitting, so even if they made modular bays to fit it would still have the torpedo holders sticking through the bays. Since the Retaliator is for Squadron 42 the 'fixed version' was/is being tested there. Having found solutions, they can now use those for the Hull C.

They have been known, but very rare, only 5 reports of a triple in the last 250 years. They were viewed as imaginary until a photo was taken of one in Germany in 2011... there was also a quadruple rainbow photo taken in Germany that same year.

All rainbows are double, it's just that very often you can't the see the outer fainter one.

June 6th 1944 Operation Overlord - more popularly known as the D-Day landings in Normandy. The 'D' is for 'Decision' since the operation had been in planning for many months, and even postponed several times.

hey have already said they will have aurora, and I'm sure they will have rainbows... they have the right conditions for it. The first video showing off the earliest Area 18 had rain. There are planets with oceans and ocean planets so the water cycle would be noticeable by it's absence not much chance Chris would be happy with that.

It's a lot less subtle and nuanced than that. There is a bit of 'player annoyance' in the intent especially aimed at newcomers, but the main aim is to make it so the streamers (the very people this project relies on to spread the word) do 'this game bad, CIG bad developer' publishing for them. Happens every milestone, in-game event and every celebration of something. This jiggery-pokery only happens on a small percentage of servers, because there just aren't that many of them that think it's worth the time... more clap from the sidelines, go to Reddit to downvote and be generally obnoxious.. or even come in here to bump pointless 'intended to fan the flames' threads and upvote their 'heroes'.

Oh yeah... snow-storming the forum with bait threads is another favourite tactic. While your link is informative - thank you, a link to the Frontier Developments Elite Dangerous long running Star Citizen thread would be even more eye-opening, and significantly more relevant.

It's a lot less subtle and nuanced than that. There is a bit of 'player annoyance' in the intent especially aimed at newcomers, but the main aim is to make it so the streamers (the very people this project relies on to spread the word) do 'this game bad, CIG bad developer' publishing for them. Happens every milestone, in-game event and every celebration of something. This jiggery-pokery only happens on a small percentage of servers, because there just aren't that many of them that think it's worth the time... more clap from the sidelines, go to Reddit to downvote and be generally obnoxious.. or even come in here to bump pointless 'intended to fan the flames' threads and upvote their 'heroes'.

Oh yeah... snow-storming the forum with bait threads is another favourite tactic. While your link is informative - thank you, a link to the Frontier Developments Elite Dangerous long running Star Citizen thread would be even more eye-opening, and significantly more relevant.

It's planned to be a constantly running, never stops 24/7, 365 day/year universe simulator. This simulation of the whole universe run on the backend is mirrored to the Live game service via the Replication Layer Gateway Service for the places where players are so that DGS's on each shard are spun up with a copy of that location that the players exist in. Time never stops in this simulation, this is why you can't log in to find your avatar in the exact same state as you left it.

The systems are being designed to do as you asked, as explained by others above. EntityGraph is what underpins this persistence, it is a hard recorded snapshot of everything, including players (millions of entities) in the game universe several times a second to restore the universe state back to if there is a failure at any level. There is a 'DGS crash recovery suite' planned which will use EntityGraph to restore newly spun up servers that replace those that went down.

Hopefully you'll always stow your character via the log out methods - I believe we will get camp beds we can use if you're away from a viable log out place.

However if you are logged off without being stowed and the DGS / Replication Layer Gateway Service is still running then it is planned you will indeed be 'autopiloted' back to the nearest safe harbour to 'stow' your character, however there is no guarantee that process will be uneventful. That AI is still operating in the same game universe under the same conditions as everything and everyone else.

The most vehemently toxic in the community, surprising to some maybe, are the ones who use multiple accounts on Spectrum. They aren't particularly concerned about 'the rules'. There are many many huge supporters of the project who don't visit the forum anymore because of this toxicity. This was by intention, to drive away the most knowledgeable and helpful.

Ok. Let me break this down.

Currently each DGS is acting as a standalone shard. Let's say there are 10,000 players on 100 shards - each shard is sending duplicate data about the state of everything on that shard. Let's say there's one player awaiting the hangar doors at New Babbage Spaceport on every shard - that's 100 'open hangar door' network requests to register on pCache - 1 from each shard.

With static server meshing there may be 1 shard with as many servers meshed together as needed covering the Stanton system, only 1 of those servers is holding New Babbage Spaceport, but the other 9,999 players are spread around Stanton across all the meshed servers on that shard. With this set up there is no duplication of the New Babbage Spaceport 'open hangar door' network data sent to the pCache. We've gone from 100 standalone shards sending data about that entity - the hangar door - to 1. No duplication, even with Static Server Meshing.

For reasons of signal travel time over the world network backbone they will have regional shards for a long time to come and so the number of shards maybe around 10 - 15. On each shard there can only be one New Babbage Spaceport. Remember there is no limit to the number of chunks of the Stanton system that can be held on a meshed server system, they could have one planet per server, one moon per server even one space station per server. Because the amount of entities per game area has been significantly reduced it's player load per server can be raised, ie more players playing together on a shard - they are all on the meshed server shard in that area simultaneously and able to interact with each other. There is no duplication of entities within that shard.

Static Server Meshing is not as efficient because if even 1 player is present in an area a server for that area has to be spun up if the meshed servers already spun up don't include that area - the statically meshed server's area of authority once spun up is fixed = Static. 1 player on Cellin for example, while everyone else stayed around Crusader on the Crusader meshed server.

Dynamic Server Meshing means that if a player at busy Crusader decides to go all on his lonesome to Cellin, rather than having to spin up another server just for Cellin the boundary of authority of the server holding Crusader is extended to include Cellin, it's borders are not fixed, they are dynamically reacting to what the player is doing. It doesn't change the number of shards, but it maximises the server player population per shard.

So.. yes, Static Server Meshing will massively reduce the number of running shards, and that will cut down on duplicated network traffic per shard.

It's all related to the reworked network traffic between the Hybrid Layer (what will become the Replication Layer Gateway Service) and the pCache which is the hard copy database that persistent entity streaming uses to load up up-to-date servers... and yes they are getting out of sync, when the player sees the door to the hangar open, the pCache has it recorded as closed - so the next time the pCache gets a record of where the ship is.. boom! and the wreckage persists. The bandwidth required for this network traffic is huge, any stoppage (disconnect) or slowdown results in what we see in the game. They can and will still keep tweaking for better network performance but the thing that will make it all go away finally is Server Meshing because this will massively reduce the number of shards sending duplicate data to the Hybrid Service and pCache.

There are thousands of shards running copies of the Stanton system right now, the more players the more shards. Every single one of them is plugged into this persistent entity streaming suite of networked systems and sending updates of entity states on each server several times a second. Some of that data is just not making it through either at all, or in time.

You don't know what combo packages they are considering, they might offer a tempting discounted combo that comes within your already spent budget. They may even offer a discounted Squadron 42 standalone for existing backers. The fact that they've taken all combo's down as well as the addon suggests a full on rework of combos. They know very well what the community considers a 'must have' hot combo pack.

Let's not judge until we see.

The main game that only a few short weeks ago (May 12th) got a massive backend tech upgrade to support full persistence in a live multiplayer environment like no other, that game you mean? You understand the Arena Commander upgrades are by a different team from those networking and engineering teams working on the PU, and were planned months ago?

Yes, but it was it rudimentary and Chris wanted it improving. No point in having one system for the SataBall game and a completely different improved system for Squadron 42 and the PU as a whole.

I don't think copyright has any bearing, there's no copyright for racing wheeled vehicles around a track is there? Have you taken a look at some of the ships? It's different enough. They can only copyright the content for the book and movie, they can't copyright an idea for a game they never made. Did you see the sandworm at the CitizenCon demo? Chris Roberts long time friend and colleague, Ortwin Freyermuth (a lawyer specialising in the entertainment industry) used to own and run a movie production company before they started Cloud Imperium Games, if anyone knows more about copyright than them they're unlikely to be hanging around in this forum.

SataBall, often assumed to be dead because no-one talks about it. There are cryptic references to it in the PU, look around. It required tractor beam push pull, only recently in the game, and hand to hand zero G traversal.. shown off at last CitCon as being worked on for Squadron 42.

They also used to talk frequently about The Spectrum, particularly the news shows. Now silence.

You know what else mostly lies behind a wall of silence that never used to? Squadron 42.

Why did they talk about SataBall all those years ago? I can give you the answer to that straight from Jared Huckaby's lips to me in person just over a year ago... "The PU was originally going to start in the Terra system", not Stanton. It was the advent of procedural planet production that changed that. Where is the most prestigious SataBall Arena? In geostationary orbit of Terra III directly above the city of Prime.

I asked another question, If Squadron 42 was always the priority why didn''t they start work on Squadron 42 star systems first?... The answer... A long look, and silence from Jared. The 4 star systems we know they have done work on - Terra, Stanton, Pyro and Nyx all connect in a line to the Odin system. When the PU was first released the only planetary landing zone that was ready for players was Delamar - but Delamar is in the Nyx system, they've gone quiet about Nyx too. The first WIP landing zone they ever showed off, complete with an underground railway and shopping / business district was the city of Prime, it is the wall mural in the LA offices. In his early days there was a leak of CIG WIP, the one that grabbed everyone's attention was the 3D model of.. you guessed it, the city of Prime landing zone.

SataBall is not "dead".

I will give you credit for looking all that up, there's a couple of nuances you missed.

In his description of the state of the ToW gameplay Sean did say that overall performance was good but at certain points it tanked and they were looking into why.

ToW uses the same equipment yes, but we know that the new system for HUD overlays are being worked on in Squadron 42.

I have discussed previously that it is interesting that they chose Firesprite to partner for ToW, why? Because the bulk of their work was for Sony Entertainment Division, for consoles.

Chris has said that Star Citizen and Squadron 42 are unlikely to come out on consoles because they don't have the capability or flexibility to run those game modes.. but they might run a standalone console version of Arena Commander modules set in the Star Citizen universe.

It certainly would widen the reach to a broader playerbase and be a continuing revenue stream for the project as a whole if Arena Commander modules were supported on consoles. There are wrinkles, contracts and licenses etc. There would also be work needed to update HUD elements to fit that narrow use case... More 'gamified' than for PC.

I don't know any more than anyone else on the matter, but it's an interesting thing to ponder. Timing would be important if it were the case.

I will give you credit for looking all that up, there's a couple of nuances you missed.

In his description of the state of the ToW gameplay Sean did say that overall performance was good but at certain points it tanked and they were looking into why.

ToW uses the same equipment yes, but we know that the new system for HUD overlays are being worked on in Squadron 42.

I have discussed previously that it is interesting that they chose Firesprite to partner for ToW, why? Because the bulk of their work was for Sony Entertainment Division, for consoles.

Chris has said that Star Citizen and Squadron 42 are unlikely to come out on consoles because they don't have the capability or flexibility to run those game modes.. but they might run a standalone console version of Arena Commander modules set in the Star Citizen universe.

It certainly would widen the reach to a broader playerbase and be a continuing revenue stream for the project as a whole if Arena Commander modules were supported on consoles. There are wrinkles, contracts and licenses etc. There would also be work needed to update HUD elements to fit that narrow use case... More 'gamified' than for PC.

I don't know any more than anyone else on the matter, but it's an interesting thing to ponder. Timing would be important if it were the case.

Well, well, well. Isn't this interesting. When Sean Tracy told us about the 'new' FPS map that came in 2019 he said it was easier to put in the whole planet then restrict the players from moving out of the playspace area.

Aydo on Green in the Ellis system, ready for players to run around some... OK. It'll be interesting to see how it compares the concept art in the Chairman's Club Handbook.

You do come out with a lot of odd statements.

Server tick rate is dependent on RAM load. The number of players doesn't have the effect many think it does. If all the players stay in a small area then Server Object Container Streaming doesn't have to load into server RAM many instances of other areas of Stanton (and all those areas contain) where the players aren't, so more RAM for players and their gear.

The worst case scenario for server RAM load is if all the players spread to all areas of the Stanton system. Now all players and all of Stanton and contents has to be streamed into Server RAM.

Areas not loaded into server RAM do not use up CPU cycles with AI, mission logic and movement physics etc.

Why not bring all the Arena Commander stuff to the PU? Because those not engaged in the event, or those having to travel from various spawn points will fill up the RAM due to SOCS... And of course there's no requirement for full persistence network traffic through the Replication Layer in Arena Commander.

Ah.. yes. This is an oft discussed topic, but sadly not a well identified topic.

The current Star Citizen Alpha is majority CryEngine legacy capability at it's core with a some CIG 'networked in' features.
The truth is the majority of CIG's work has been, and remains, on the backend - which is massive in scope and scale compared to anything else.

CIG don't point out what is legacy (if somewhat updated) CryEngine and future intended design, we have to do detective work to figure that out. For example we know that 64bit precision, signed distance fields and Object Container Streaming are not CryEngine features, but the current waterbody simulation and hit scan/hit registration are. The player avatar rig is all CIG, but the attachment points to that rig are still basically using CryEngine that has been bullied into adding functionality. The scripted mission system is a shoehorned in CryEngine mainly feature, whereas the game external controls - elevator touch pads, mobiglas etc are CIG design and they are, somewhat to many peoples surprise, handled via the backend network not locally on the game client.

The multiplayer environment isn't conducive to testing some features, especially first person experience features or AI control, and so they do that in the controlled environment that is Squadron 42 Episode One feature testing.

If you could be more specific about what you would like to see PES do we can talk about each use case, an interesting discussion could be had on that basis. 'Trash' as you put it is just tier 0 outcome, they've dug the foundation but left it for a while to see what we make of it, or how the system handles it. They've plugged it in, checked it's working, so on the bigger things.

The answer we have come to expect, and it is reasonable, is 'priorities and resources'. All things might be possible but it's generally 'big picture stuff first' unless there's a few new recruits with features they can cut their teeth on.

We may not like it but the current Alpha is a testbed only. When they say 'Playable Now', they mean on average you can log in and see the game universe with a few odds and ends to do mainly because of that CryEngine base capability (the way a developer thinks of 'playable'.

Hmm interesting. Well, in my view the intentions of the OP are well meant even if there is evidence of a lack of boning up on the subject. No matter, it's everybody's first show sometimes!

It might be a good idea to review how we got here:
The first form of persistence came from a standalone service that ran on the backend - player item persistence - we've had that for years now. At first it didn't persist the state of any player owned item, but then around 2018 when shipboard persistence came along that changed somewhat. This form of persistence from a backend stored cache required Object Container Streaming to be implemented both on the PC game client and on the DGS. Unlike CryEngine 3 which is the base of this current Alpha saves are not stored locally on the PC client.

The way it used to work was... this backend service knew what was 'game universe owned' according to the game services and what was 'player owned'. The first form of persistence for the player was, once you had an item on your person or in your ship you took ownership from 'the game universe' so that it became player attributed. This allowed ship renting and ship buying in the game. There was no persistence for 'game universe owned items', when a server spun down or crashed anything not on you or in your ship was lost. Any 'unstowed' ship or item was lost, 'stowed' refers to being recorded on a hard drive in a database not just in server RAM.

With the advent of PES the previous attribution services are being deprecated and replaced with a whole universe persistence of every item and it's state. They started that process of transferring from the old databases with 3.18 - hence why a lot of things went wonky because that (now massive) database of items required a lot of server bandwidth... but it get's more complex than that.

Prior to 3.18 they used to connect players directly to the DGS (Dedicated Game Server) and it communicated with all the backend services through specific runtimes that ran on each DGS - this means that when a server went down all information was lost about what happened on that server because that information was only held 'live' in server RAM. Now there is a layer in-between those backend services and logged in player, initially they called it the Hybrid Service but when it is all finally in place with server meshing it will be called the Replication Layer Gateway Service (Replication Layer for short). The job of the Replication Layer is to take input from a virtual simulation of the game universe that is 'always on' - ie Persistent. It will run 24/7, 365 days/year, while it is running it records a timed snapshot of the exact state of every item in the game universe to a 'hard database' initially called the iCache, now referred to as pCache (or Persistence Cache). The advantage of this (some of them at least) is that this persistent virtual universe can always be queried from that constantly updated hard copy when a DGS spins up, and it saves the state of any server spun down or crashed to the pCache (there is a crash recovery service that runs on the backend too in this plan). Now you can see that the old attribution services are no longer necessary, because the pCache records who owns what and where and what state it is in.

Let's pause a moment to think about what the Replication Layer has to do:

It takes input from many backend services - the players inputs, the NPC Scheduler Service, the player item attribution service, the Persistent Entity Streaming service, Quantum, Quasar to name but a few. Everything is timestamped, sorted and prioritised.

The servers are running at capacity, they have 128GB of RAM - each server (thousands of them) is sending a snapshot of what it has in it's RAM several times a second and passing that to the Replication Layer for sorting, prioritising and recording to the pCache.

No data is written to a servers hard drive once it has spun up. While it is being spun up the hard drive is loaded first with the base 'level designer made' copy of whichever part of the game universe it will have authority over (currently every server has all of the Stanton system), then the pCache is queried for any additions and change states to bring that server hard drives contents up to the current time and state of the game universe (you'll notice when you open the game console there is a display of the game universe time).

The Replication Layer also loads any assets that the current state of the game universe demands from any backend services and sends that to the server hard drive. Once this process is complete players are assigned to the server where-upon Server Object Container Streaming decides what areas and assets need to be loaded from the server hard drive into server RAM so that players can see and interact with them.

Currently, without server meshing, there is a huge amount of duplication of network transmitted data because each server has a unique copy of the Stanton system but once server meshing goes in then each shard will have servers that only have authority over 1 part of the game universe - ie no duplication of game area data within a shard. Right now, since each DGS is acting as a standlaone shard there are thousands of them, once Server Meshing goes in the number of shards will be massively reduced, only very high level 'universe wide' data will be duplicated between shards.

Can you see a possible limitation? Notice that for anything to happen anywhere in the game universe SOCS has to load those assets into server RAM and it only does that for areas where players are. If they left it that way nothing would happen in any part of the game where players aren't going, those areas would be permanently 'stuck in time'. That's what the Replication Layer is there to fix, it takes the constantly running 'whole universe simulation' data and sends it to the pCache so that there is dynamic change going on in the game universe whether there are players there to see it or not. Genius eh?

Now you can let your imagination run riot!
Suppose one of the game masters decides I'm going to make a meteor shower happen in the Ellis system at a certain time, on a certain date. There are no players in the Ellis system but with a few mouse clicks and checkboxes ticked that game master spawns a meteor shower that obeys the games physics, interacts with everything in the Ellis sytem it comes into contact with and it's effects are permanent. He decides he's going to get The Spectrum News to cover the event live so a server is spun up with the Ellis system and virtual cameras are placed there so that you can log in on your mobile to watch Spectrum News and see that meteor shower and it's effects. All the NPC's are simulated and because 'he's drawn that way' the UEE Senator for the Ellis system decides he's gonna get some political capital out of this so he gets himself in front of a Spectrum News camera calling on the UEE military for disaster relief support (this is what Tony Zurovec is doing - Quantum). You decide to go there, you arrive too late to see it - but you will see the aftermath effects of it, not only on physical objects, but also on the NPC population which are all reacting in real time in that backend virtual simulation set of events to be 'Replicated' into the live game simulation, on demand. No recurrent scripts running - "There are no Heimskr's in Star Citizen", this is a one-off event, and they can run them, and any variety of them anywhere they feel like, any time they feel like it. This whole universe simulation is always running, being recorded to the pCache ready for any part of it to be replicated to the live game for players to experience. It's wild!

In summary:
They haven't 'missed a chance' to do anything, what they have planned will allow not only what the OP is asking (which has always been the stated intent) but a whole lot more, things never seen in other games. The 'persistence' that CIG refer to isn't just item persistence in the game, it is the virtual always running game universe that is fully persistent, crash proofed at every level, infinitely expandable. It allows input from all directions - players - game masters (suns going nova, plagues, famines, gold rushes, politics with their effects persisting) - backend logic simulations of NPC populations (millions of unique characters going about their lives) and 'a partridge in a pear tree' to fully persist ad infinitum as long as that Replication Layer Gateway Service is running and has access to that pCache. Imagine it, a massively populated virtual universe where things happen constantly, everywhere and you can log in to that virtual simulation game, or watch it on your mobile - access in-game services on your mobile.

We are literally weeks (3.18 went Live on May 12th) into the most monumental change in online gaming history ever seen. If you've ever dreamed of actually living in the Star Trek or Star Wars universe, in real time - this, like no other, is the game project for you.

Have no fear, this thing is bigger than both of us, and you will get all you dream of, and more - much more! People will be raving in amazement at what becomes possible with this Leviathon of a system. It is going to be a role players, social media / content media maker's wet dream of a game, always something happening, always something to talk about, not just what the players are doing! - which means massive online exposure. It's so far out there and unheard of many can't wrap their head around it. It's going to take some time to fit all the puzzle pieces together, but they are going in slowly but surely. Try not to get bogged down with each current talking point technicality, see it in the big picture. How long? No-one has ever even attempted such a thing before, so how could anyone judge (including CIG) how long it will take. But the point is... the partnership between CIG and this community allows them to attempt the seemingly impossible.

1. The Issue Council is only one branch of player reported data, they have telemetry, they have analytics. The Issue Council only informs them that some players have an in issue, if that issue is already known and currently being worked on there is no need to leave multiple Issue Council reports open about it. How the players use the IC is not CIG's fault, multiple reports not reaching the threshold means those making those reports are doing two things, failing to search the IC effectively and failing to upvote the duplicates.

2. The game performance is affected by factors outside of CIG's control, such as player hardware and quality of the players internet connection. I'm afraid the 'my internet connection is good for everything else I do' is no guarantee that it is sufficient for this project. Many players don't have the same issues, the general assumption by players is that it is server performance issues, but this is just an assumption.

3. You say that you 'achieved nothing' but that isn't the case. You may not have achieved what you expected or wanted to achieve in the game but you did log in and supply CIG with player data in a WIP Alpha project. You added one more rice grain to the pile we will all eventually happily feed on in the future. We are all game testers whether we wish it weren't so or not. You did observe that the game responds differently during a server/client disconnect (30K), this helps to inform both you and other players that there is a difference between 'standard game client control inputs' and CIG's way of handling player client control inputs. Those who know why it happens that way can add the evidence of that difference to the pile. If you have learned why elevators, ASOP terminals and a plethora of other things don't work in the game due to network issues then hopefully the achievement is that you learned something.

If you approach this project from the standpoint of being purely 'a casual gamer' then you will suffer these frustrations (we all have them from time to time) - in his last Letter From The Chairman Chris did plainly state that the next year or so after PES was implemented would be a rough one. PES on it's own is a huge strain on server resources until it's 'balancing partner', server meshing, comes along to alleviate that strain. We're playing a bastardised hybrid of half built planned tech implementation and legacy CryEngine code. We're playing in a game that is partially built with completely new pieces not seen outside of this project, so yes they do take it to extreme breaking point on purpose.

If the process of game design itself is of interest then the achievement and satisfaction doesn't come from getting credits, ships, reaching a mission marker etc, it comes from knowing that uniquely in the game industry the player (you) are a partner in this process of striving for something so radically different... that yes... our grandkids will appreciate the efforts made, because it is going to change the gaming industry. That is the main intent of this project. Always has been.

I'm sure you are well aware there can be no permanent meaningful player progress right now or for the near future, so what's the angst about? In 6 to 12 months there definitely will be another full reset, perhaps even sooner. The 'game' is discovery.. ask why.. why is that Corsair doing that? Why don't the terminals work? Why is the game unresponsive to commands sometimes? If the act of asking 'why' motivates you to go and find out stuff, then you have achieved something better than a few credits, or a temporary ship to fly around in... and sure, you can bore your grandkids senseless with all that inside knowledge you picked up through the all trials and tribulations.

Yes I do stop to think that the videos are for the players, which is why I question the lack of informed practice. If the approach was to go to the base information given, then demonstrate that information as well as making comparison.. then all good. The community can be better informed by this trickle down of what is frankly confusing tech-speak to most.

Another aspect of the approach is to show change over time, is it any wonder Jared has chosen the strapline 'The only constant is change'. Yet Camural doesn't present it as such, he talks in terms of this is the way it is and doesn't talk about planned changes to come.

Yes, there are many things still not implemented, we know that, we tick a box numerous times before playing this Alpha WIP.

If CIG has a fault it is that they don't repeat, update or expand upon information already given especially since another of Jared's taglines is 'It's always someone's first show', inherent in that idea is that those for whom this is their first exposure to information about development are very unlikely to have a full picture of where development is right now or where it plans to go from the years and years of intensive information flow. A lot of the angst in the community is entirely due to this variance in each community contributors understanding of previous information given. CIG very rarely present their information in the context of the wider gaming industry practice so that anyone is not aware of 'standard practice' doesn't know the context or value of what CIG is doing. This is merely stating a fact, CIG are NOT taking the standard approach to many aspects of what they produce, it is not 'White Knighting' CIG. It is up to us to inform ourselves so that we can make our own judgements about whether one approach over another appeals to us. If you're fine with NPC's being clones, or if you don't mind loading screens, then that aspect of this project won't mean much to you.

The naysayers are constantly talking about comparing to other released games, even though they KNOW this is nowhere near a released game or final product. They talk about how long and how much money it has taken, yet completely ignore the differences between this project and 'other games'. Worse in my view they fail to analyse other game projects and point out the differences between industry standard approach to problem solving, and how what CIG are doing bucks the trend in researching, developing and implementing such an innovative approach... they simply dismiss it as Chris Roberts 'perfectionism'. Solving age old problems is not perfectionism, it is an attempt to drive the industry forward to take advantage of other innovations in the field of computer technology.

They also fail to point out the 'standard' segmented nature of computer game technology - usually innovations come from those who only job is to produce game engines that make games - then those tools are sold to game developers, there is a feedback loop. Example Sean Tracy did not originally work for CIG, he worked as 'Roving Ambassador to CryTek R&D team, his job was to feedback ideas for improvement of CryEngine to CryTek. CIG have brought all of this R&D in-house and it is ongoing while producing a live game product for mass use - this is unheard of, bringing R&D this close to the coal face to be tested in the fires of mass participation. This was the whole point of going the crowdfunded route because standard game development funding always takes the safe, known, tried and tested route where the 'suits' treat gamers as consumers of product rather than as a community of participators in the process - we don't have to do that. We don't have to accept that.

If you want to better inform player choices, you should start from that reality. If it is the case that simply saying 'we're not there yet' is seen as 'defending CIG', then frankly that kind of partisanship entrenched attitude is not worth engaging with. Reality is reality, it is not a defense of anything. Collectively the community and CIG gave ourselves the opportunity to push the bounds far beyond what standard game development funding would allow. Intrinsic in this idea of 'funding' is the time taken to research and develop new methods of achieving results that allow more freedom to the players. What seems trivial and unnecessary to some is a core element to others, each player makes the choice about what matters to them and there are thousands of games out there that allow a 'best fit' for their choices. If a cat lover joins a kennel club and starts preaching about the benefits of cat grooming it would be perfectly in order to suggest, maybe you're in the wrong place, with the wrong attitude? That wouldn't be 'white knighting' dog owners would it?

Another respondent above bemoans how terrible it is that CIG hasn't properly implemented hit scan / hit boxes in the game 'after 11years', this again fails to take into account that CIG are planning to completely do away with hit scan detection and hit boxes in Star Citizen and Squadron 42.

When they hear 'physicalisation' their mind goes to some limited notion of cargo boxes and backpack contents - but physicalisation touches far more than that.

When CIG first explained that bullets would be actually physicalized in the game - you load it into a magazine, it actually travels down the barrel and flies through whatever medium (and it's effects are applied to that bullet travel), it has weight and kinetic energy, they nod and think they have fully understood what that particular form of physicalisation refers to - but that isn't all it refers to. The bullet will not impact a 'hitbox' it will impact a physical object in the game and it's effect will be transferred to that physical object - permanently, the 'damage' is appropriate and at the exact site that the bullet hit affecting both the surface and underlying structure of that physicalized object, and even any object inside that object. The current in-game hitbox detection is legacy code from CryEngine. So great, take the time to examine that legacy code effect if you want, but maybe it would inform players better if you look at some innovation CIG HAS actually implemented and explain that?

Anyone who is satisfied with other game's way of registering hits will wonder why take years to research and develop this rigorously physicalised approach, it's because it allows things that other games don't allow, such as accurate response to external conditions like atmospheric density, gravity, ricochets, bullet fragmentation, bullet penetration, magazine loading and various types of propellant and bullet make up. It means you can have bullet holes in structures that aren't just a surface applied decal. You've gone from having a simulated scripted bullet travel to a reactive 'real world' bullet simulation.

This approach to full physicalisation affects so many things it's hard to wrap your head around it. Many gamers extrapolate the real world experience into their games, they assume it works in-game, in all games, like real life. Doesn't every game do it that way? - No, they absolutely do not! If you're surprised that a Pico held at arms length will stop a point blank bullet from a machine gun, then you haven't really looked at how other games work. It is not CIG's intended design that a Pico can be used as armor shielding. Even games, like flight simulators, that take account of weight and size of passengers and cargo don't fully simulate those objects, a script is applied to simulate them. Star Citizen aims to fully physicalise everything, which means that if your backpack is full of a certain object the mass of that object is taken account of when you place it aboard a ship. Inertia and impact damage will affect objects inside objects inside objects. If it doesn't blow your mind, you simply haven't understood it and you definitely haven't understood why this is radically different to what anyone else is doing or has done. Chris is doing the coding for this himself, will he do it? None of us can know, but it is his intent and the fact that anyone would even try to give such an experience to players is worth both the time and the money as far as those in the community who want a radically different approach to game simulation are concerned.

Camural's issue from my perspective is that he has failed to grasp the whole premise of the project fully before diving in to give his assessment based upon 'the wider gaming genre'. He thinks he's pointing out the flaws in CIG's intended design, which fails to take into account that the current game release is on a hybrised version of CryEngine, the faults he is drawing attention to are actually the limitations of that legacy CryEngine, but he either doesn't know that, or he fails to acknowledge it.

I think the majority view might be that the word 'wasted' is not appropriate. It depends upon your standpoint, and of course, your standpoint is one of ignorance of the true scope, scale and progress of Squadron 42 as it is for most of us. Example: Personally I think people spending millions on designing, developing and tool making for ICE powered cars is a complete waste of money and detrimental - others have different views.

Scope - as in the variety of things to do and see. The Stanton system has more scope than any other game in it's genre including some we know are planned and not released yet by much bigger development studios, and we know there is more to come. Example: they thought about putting refueling into Starfield and decided against it. The main rival games in the genre don't have such things as rivers, caves, race tracks etc. Yes there are plenty of small volume single world games out there to play, but they don't have the scale and intended variety.

Scale - the sheer volume of the intended playspace. We know there are many more systems to come, which if they have anywhere near the scope of the current Stanton system, or better, it will be unrivalled in the gaming industry as a whole, let alone in it's genre. How many times have we heard dev team members say on camera 'Are we allowed to talk about that yet?' the most obvious take from that is that there are things not yet revealed. The current Stanton system is not only a small test-bed, it is also only used for testing things that are not more suited for testing in Squadron 42.

The preparation work, and the duration of that work, to lay the foundations for a 4 bedroom house to a standard set of plans are very different to the preparations required for a massive bespoke office block. You also need a different toolset and a larger scope of skillsets. CIG are simultaneously making tools, systems and assets for 4+ games (while servicing a live alpha release, which is almost unheard of), not one, how cost effective is that? It's a franchise they are making, they are not merely 'building a game' from a known previously developed toolset.

Squadron 42 is not some standalone game completely separate in scale and scope from the multiplayer universe - like a Call of Duty single player is to it's multiplayer and mini mission maps. Squadron 42 takes place in the same game universe, so all it's contents will come to the PU minus the story elements. If we are considering 'value for money' in terms of game development that is a '2 for 1' scenario. I'm struggling to recall any two AAA standalone games that used the same assets in both.

Development up to now has consisted of:
Building the teams
Outfitting the premises
Building the design and the systems that support that design
Building the tools to make game assets and systems
Building and refining the pipelines

There is no wastage, those tools and pipelines will produce (probably are already) and they will do it faster and faster as the teams are expanded and trained. The money has been spent on making tangible assets that can produce time and time again, they are proprietary. They have solved issues that have plagued the game industry since it's inception, those toolsets are something other game design company's CEO's would sell their firstborn child to get a hold of.

People think of Chris Roberts as a game designer / builder, he isn't, he's a systems engineer. He has built a team of very advanced engineers to make tools that do things never dreamt of previously. In other games of this genre you have to have a skybox, which means loading screen to go from ground to space, their procedural planet tech production means no skybox, so no need for that loading screen, the atmosphere and amazing sunsets come as a bonus. He doesn't like to use the 'quick fix' solutions you find in other games if he can find a way to do it better or more realistically. The DNA system for example which had to solve the clipping / fitting problem you get when using standard game design tools. Star Citizen will have asymmetry in it's character creation and outfitting for all characters, not just the handmade bespoke characters.

He has told us that he (as in him doing the coding personally) is working on a system that allows accurate hit and damage representation to the player characters or their equipment, and that includes NPC's, rather than the industry standard hit boxes and pre-made damage states. Rebellion Developments were so impressed with their version of basically the same thing in Sniper Elite they made a whole game franchise out of it, Chris is doing it in his own time after work while running this multinational company. Play a racing car game and to you it looks like when you crash you cause damage, but that's because at the moment of impact the model is switched to one of many damage state models for that vehicle or part of that vehicle, that's why most racing games are in very very small areas with very low player counts to reduce loading times.

They have also mentioned they are working on rigid body deformation, that means you can crush, warp and bend things in the game according to forces applied - buckled landing gear, bent wings and ship hulls etc as well as having a physics model that supports those damage states. These are things normally only seen in tech demo's. If you talk to team members in person, as I have, they will tell you about the incredible scope and scale and how it is beyond anything they have ever seen - they aren't talking about the game, they are talking about about the toolsets the engineers have dreamed up that allow them to do things they've never been able to do with other companies they have worked for.

Crushing hulls in 'ship munchers' is several orders of magnitude more difficult to achieve than beam stripping from the surface of a ship or breaking each ship into it's damage state components, the fact they have even mooted the idea as possible, in a massively open world game, is quite frankly mind-blowing to anyone who understands how 3D meshes are made and used in game engines. Innovations like these come rarely to existing game creation engines. I listened carefully to Todd Howard's presentation about Starfield which uses the Creation Kit - the same Skyrim Creation Kit you can go and download yourself, the changes to that toolset are fairly minor - Starfield is being made with basically the same toolset as Skyrim V was... according to Todd Howard's own words. Bethesda's NPC's can use ladders now! If Todd Howard knew that the Creation Kit now accurately modelled thruster outputs on ship models he would be shouting it from the rooftops, because he knows the Creation Kit never supported such a functionality before.

Of course this all brings us to the oft quoted 'It's taking too long!' chant. Since this project started Chris and his team have been described as 'certifiably insane', 'batshit crazy', and 'out there!' with respect to what they are attemptiong to make. How long does batshit crazy, certifiably insane and out there take to make? No-one really knows because no-one else has been batshit crazy, certifiably insane 'out there' enough to even try. We have no yardstick to measure how long it 'should take' or how much it 'should cost'. All we know is that despite all the naysayers they just keep doing it, making things happen the way they said they planned to make it happen.

In the beginning of a project you need very highly skilled (read rare and expensive) people for those first stages, but as the tools are made then far less experienced people (cheaper) can be trained specifically to use the tools produced, as experienced team members become more familiar with the tools and assets their production rate increases too. We've seen this happen. There is a big difference between procedural generation and procedural production, the majority of work to date has gone on R&D 'under the hood', the scale, scope and type of R&D you just don't find elsewhere.

Does he? Or does he simply not keep up to date and informed well enough to know what to expect before he dives in? Where is the value to the dev teams in that? Proving / demonstrating something they already know very well?

There are plenty of good things to test, which could inform players about how the game currently works and what changes are happening, even basic bug searching, but in order to figure out how to do THOSE tests he'd have to update and inform himself.

He treats Star Citizen like it is a released 'standard game' not a completely different Alpha WIP. With lots of features still to go in. It's a shame he doesn't, all those efforts wasted only to be told 'Yeah, no shit Sherlock. We know'.

The method is fine, it's the things he chooses to test that reveal he doesn't really inform himself. There's no armour implemented and even though there is an on-screen HUD depiction of segmented damage it's just for show, there is only a basic damage score, it doesn't matter where you shoot a player or NPC unless it's a head shot (in Star Citizen the head and body are two separate entities), yet he tested it extensively. Anyone could have told him, you can shoot a players hand/glove until they die because the planned disablement mechanic isn't in yet. We know the armour pieces only affect overall damage points, which is a placeholder mechanism. We have been told.

There is a quote from Chris Roberts which became a meme - "Yeah. No shit! We know it's missing!"

The system described on the AtV has not changed, only expanded.

As stated by others you will connect to your regional AWS hub for account authentication, all internet connections to CIG services then run through the AWS backbone. There are only a few countries that don't have an AWS edge service (the thing you initially connect to), the majority do. The map below shows AWS hubs.

Since that show something else has changed, the way the player client and services interact.

Normally in most multiplayer games you would connect to a game service and any change you make via your game client takes place first on your PC game client and you see the result of that input immediately. That 'change state' is then passed to the game service which then sends out that change state to all connected clients so that they can see the result of your actions. This is where lag comes from. If someone has a slow connection they see the result of their action a significant time before any other players sees the result of that action. If you (or any other player) have a symmetric connection your up and down lag are additive so a 250ms up plus a 250ms down appear as a half a second lag.

If you take careful note of how Star Citizen handles inputs you will see that there is a wait period between you initiating a command on your PC local client and you seeing the result of that command - for certain things. You will also notice that during any period of time you are disconnected from the Star Citizen game services (a 30K before the game client wait to connect timer runs out) there are certain actions you simply can't do, like call an elevator, use your inventory, turn on your ship, QT jump, open a door or even fire a weapon. To differentiate between what is client first and 'server first' all you have to do is note what you can and can't do when disconnected. For example you can be injured and continue bleeding out and running while disconnected, but you can't use a medpen while disconnected.

The reason this happens is because Star Citizen changed the way they handle player input commands to avoid the advantageous effects of internet connection lag. Now instead of you inputting a command and seeing the result of that command first, that command is sent down the network to the game services first, there is a wait timer to collect all inputs from players within a given time period. Those commands are then executed in the game world and only then are the results of those actions sent down to each connected game client, including you. So while a player may have an input lag of 250ms, it won't make any/much difference to other players because you, and all other players, only see the result of that action after the Dedicated Game Server initiated it and informed all connected clients simultaneously.

Players do not connect directly to the DGS shards, they connect through the hub, then the Hybrid Service (which will become the Replication Layer Gateway Service -RL). The RL then updates the DGS's on each shard and the persistence layer simultaneously and only once that process has completed are players informed simultaneously of change states in the game world through the Hybrid service to each hub and connected client. If you check on the RSI main page you will see a diagram of how the shard services are arranged (look for the topic 'Server Meshing') and you will see that players only connect to the Replication Layer Gateway Service on that diagram. There are other backend services that also affect the game world and they also feed into the RL

There are very good reasons for organising it this way and they mostly have to do with how many backend simulations feed into the game world, like Quantum, Quasar and the Full Persistence services etc.

While you may be able to move or peek around a corner sooner than any other player sees it, you can't shoot the other player until they 'see you' shoot unless they have a particularly bad 'down' ping rate. Everything in the game is physicalised which means it is tracked and recorded in the persistence database millisecond by millisecond. Player clients are informed of those changes simultaneously only once the changes take effect in the game world. In effect when you input a command you are requesting that change, but the confirmation of any change request only comes down to you (and all other connected clients) after the game world has registered it.

The system can group players by ping rate.

The majority of issues we see in the game currently, what people refer to as 'lag', isn't actually standard game lag it is the backend systems network communication between the new systems they have put in place to support full persistence that is the issue. They are gradually working through those issues, it's a brand new system only put in place on the Live servers since March 10th. Plenty of time yet to iron out any backend network issues.

TL:DR
Standard game server lag does not exist in Star Citizen because of the way the game services and executing player commands are structured. You do see ships jumping around (teleporting), and it looks a lot like standard server lag, but this is because the ships position and orientation are being updated from those backend services and they are struggling to keep up with current events - 'getting out of sync' as the dev's call it. Players see weapon fire whizz past them yet it records a hit, that's because the backend persistence services had you in that position to be hit the last time they received an update about your ships position. There is evidence that ship move commands have been changed very recently from 'client first' like player move commands, to 'server first' and this is why some are reporting 'a bug' that their ship becomes unresponsive to inputs when that backend network is struggling. It has almost nothing to do with player ping rates.

The inner thought is being reworked it was shown off in the last presentation of the last CitizenCon with Chris and Richard Tyrer. they also said we would have customisation of the controls. Simply looking at an item will highlight it, and they actually said they were making it the same way it works in other games.

Downstream teams get work allocated in 3 month chunks, upstream teams get work allocated in 6 month chunks. The Engineering Team is an upstream team so the progress Tracker for their work assignments gets updated in June.

There are three terms you have to grasp to understand how Star Citizen works and why it is different to other games:
Player Client Authoritative
Server Authoritative
Service Authoritative
Player Client Authoritative
Most online games use a player client authoritative approach. You press a key, your game client carries out that action to cause a change in the state of an entity in your game, like a ship - say 'pitch up'. That changed state is then sent to the server where it is passed to any player clients (and NPC's) connected who should see the result of that pitch up command. This leaves the system open to server lag, where the player sees something happen first and other players only see the result of that action afterward. Star Citizen used to work this way too but it was changed. It is also the case that most games (not all) spin up servers in a fixed 'level designer built state' that has no persistence, which is again the way Star Citizen used to work before PES.
Server Authoritative
Initially Star Citizen changed to Server Authoritative. The player presses a key, that command is sent to the server and once the server has collected all those commands within a set time frame then that change state command is sent out to all connected players who in theory should now see the pitch up response simultaneously. This is why nothing responds in the game while waiting for the 30K timeout notification of client / server disconnection. We know they must have changed the ship move commands from Client Authoritative to Service Authoritative because of the no response (or very very slow response) to ship control inputs. The only thing remaining client authoritative is the player move commands from what I can see.
Service Authoritative
Once the Hybrid Service (precursor to the Replication Layer Gateway Service often referred to simply as the Replication Layer) was connected to the DGS (Dedicated Game Server shards) and Entity Graph (PES) the system was changed again. Now the player command goes to the Hybrid Service which stands between the player and server where it is then sent simultaneously to the DGS shard and Entity Graph. Example: Once your ship crosses a certain boundary near a landing area the Hybrid Service knows where you are and it knows to contact the ATC Service, you can now request to land. When you do that the ATC service decides if there is a hangar available and assigns it to you, when you approach close enough to the correct hangar door it opens them for you. When you land on a pad it registers you have landed. In the PTU build I last played the ATC Service didn't respond or assign me a hangar until I'd flown back down to Hurston, then it kept telling me every few minutes "All our landing pads are full" for about 30 minutes until I disconnected.

Once the change state has been acknowledged that change state is then passed back through the Hybrid Service and out to all connected player clients. The Hybrid Service (and later the RL to come) is a live microsecond by microsecond recording service that collects and registers the change state of all the entities in the game world (think of it as an active game save for the whole game world), absolutely everything is recorded.

The Entity Graph is the 'hard copy' recording of all those change state inputs which is needed because DGS shards spin down, or stream game areas out of RAM when there is no player present. If an area of a game is not in active server RAM then no changes can take place except through the simulated game world services (Quantum / Quasar etc) inputting into the Hybrid Service and Entity Graph. This allows changes to happen in the game universe even in places where there are no players present, it's the gods eye view on the game universe. The thing that is being 'replicated' is the always running backend game universe simulation onto the live game servers so that players can interact with that running simulation.

When players don't understand how the game system works, when they seem to have no response to an input they just keep spamming inputs, which of course makes the situation worse. Often if you just wait, and wait you'll see the response to the input, sometimes several minutes later depending on how overloaded the backend network is.

...
Why do it this way?

1. To cut down on apparent player to player lack of simultaneity caused by network lag.

2. So that change states can be recorded to a database service (PES) so that when a server spins up the Shard Manager Service loads the fixed assets made by the level designer, inputs from any other services like the NPC Scheduler or the Mission Service, and then queries the Entity Graph through the Replication Layer Gateway Service to bring that server up to date with the exact up to the microsecond game world state ie Full Persistence - before any player is loaded in.

If there is a failure (or slowdown) of network traffic between the player client, the Hybrid Service and DGS shard or Entity Graph then any actions taken by the player will not appear to work, it looks like good old server lag in extremis but it isn't. It's neither a game client bug nor a game server build bug, or game server state problem relating to control commands, it's a network / service issue between the services responsible for controlling the game state.

3. It also means that if a player is disconnected from a server shard because it has crashed they are still connected the Hybrid Service ready to transfer to another server that is running, or after a short period of non-responsiveness in the game another server is spun up to the exact state the server crashed in and the players are transferred to the new server, which looks exactly like the crashed server.

This is why they keep saying the databases are getting out of sync with what is supposed to be happening in the game world because they monitor all inputs to the Hybrid Service (which have time stamps) and can check any mismatch between it and the DGS and Entity Graph etc.

We have to remember they are building a live system that is supposed to run uninterrupted for years and years, that's why every service and system has to have a live back up to restore from immediately if that part of the system goes down... that's why it's referred to as 'The Living Breathing Universe'. Once it goes live it never stops, it will be always changing even if there are no players around those areas to see those changes take place.

In his last Letter From The Chairman Chris warned everyone that while all the services underpinning Full Persistence were being put in and bug fixed, it would be a rocky road, it is a massively complex suite of network connected systems. Each part of the system cannot be put in piece by piece and expected to work flawlessly, they have to go in together and be synchronised.

For example: As we can see on the Progress Tracker we could confidently say they are still working on the DGS Crash Recovery Service, if they had it in place and working well with the Hybrid Service and/or Entity Graph we wouldn't see 30k's anymore unless it was a player client ISP connection that failed:

When we consider that Persistent Entity Streaming only went live with 3.18.0 on March 10th of this year, the huge restructuring of how the live game service works and the sheer number of backend services that have to be removed from the DGS's and plugged in to that new structure...
The NPC Scheduler Service
The ATC Service
The Persistent Entity Streaming Service (a whole suite of new services)
The Shard Manager Service
The ASOP Terminal Service (which they re-organised)
The Player Inventory Service
The Mission Service (and added new missions)
The Error Reporting Service
The Player Authorisation Service

..to name but a few, there's loads of them, it's amazing they have the game to a reasonably playable state for the majority, even if it staggers a few times under huge player loads. All while providing a live game environment service, with ongoing events! ...and they are adding more stuff to the game while still working on that restructured network system, with Server Meshing to come. It boggles the mind, it's only been 2 months since 3.18.0 went live! Think of the forward planning that must have gone into restructuring all those moving parts - which mechanic is expected to completely rebuild a brand new engine into a car, while the car is running? Think of the massive amounts of error codes they must have had to wade through from every system involved in the delivery of that live game service, to be able to bug fix it enough to get it to where it is now.

Cut them some slack please. They've reached a milestone in this race no other game developer would even attempt.

As another has said above Squadron 42 is not multiplayer so it does not need the same amount of backend resources and network traffic. The current problems with the servers are all about those backend network connections to the persistence database and other services that put things into the game.

Some things causing high network traffic will just go away when those temporary systems are taken out of the game, for example when you open your inventory or a loot box all those items are handled by a service that doesn't run on the DGS's, when things are fully physicalised rather than in a remote inventory database that problem goes away, and it won't be an issue with Squadron 42 there won't be thousands of players all requesting a ship at the ASOP terminals, checking out loot boxes or opening their inventory. There will be no mission service providing activities for thousands of players running in Squadron 42 as there is for the PU.

There a few other things to note however:

The game runs in a version of the StarEngine that is no different to the multiplayer, there will be no huge amount of work to bring things already made for Squadron 42 to the PU. Some things will need updating because Squadron 42 takes place in the past and the Squadron 42 assets don't include anything the player won't visit in a star system. As Jared Huckaby said.. "Squadron 42 is basically one giant dynamic mission in the Star Citizen universe".

If you go to the main page you will find a link to where they describe their plan for how the backend services for the PU will be structured, from it you will see that no player will connect directly to the DGS, we will connect to the Replication Layer Gateway (RL)* and that sends update information both to the persistence layer and the DGS's, this is to allow players to see events and actions of other players all at the same time. Squadron 42 is not multiplayer there is no need for other players to see the result of any action taken by other players - therefore the RL and Persistence Service aren't needed. It will still be an online game because account authentication and saves will be handled remotely by CIG.

The Star Citizen universe is dynamic, it will have network connected services that cause change over time like Quantum and Quasar, the Squadron 42 game is not dynamic, all events are scripted, it doesn't need to connect to those services.

Loot boxes and inventories (and all the network bandwidth they take up) are a temporary solution for the lack of server meshing, if the contents of those boxes and inventories were all physicalised into the game now the entity count per server would go even higher, all of which has to be loaded into server RAM and they take up CPU runtime for collisions etc. When server meshing frees up server RAM and CPU runtime those items can be physicalised and you will find them scattered around the game environment - on shelves, in lockers, inside storage boxes etc. You won't be able to magic drag anything into the game that isn't already present once everything is physicalised, otherwise what would be the point of cargo lifts and trollies if you can just throw everything into your inventory while you run around?

Object Container Streaming will still be active in Squadron 42, and ship interior culling, so that only entities local to a single player need to be loaded. This is not the case with the PU servers which have to load all assets into server RAM in the Stanton system if players spread out over the whole system - this is a major part of what server meshing is meant to address, reducing RAM load on each DGS in the PU shard. If you have a large fleet battle in space in Squadron 42 it means that no landing zones, planets, moons, distant space stations and their contents etc need to be loaded into RAM, and of course no other players and the things they bring with them - which means much more 'battle specific' entities can be loaded into RAM.

* What will become the full Replication Layer Gateway Service is currently handled by something called 'The Hybrid Service' which is a temporary service until the RL is fully connected to the Persistence Service and the DGS's, some of the communication with the Persistence Service still runs on the DGS's - those will be moved to the Replication Layer Gateway Service and off the DGS's.

These questions have been addressed.

Quarterdeck prison. A prison planet run by the UEE military. For capital offences.

Squadron 42 has the ships brig.

The PU currently has Klescher Rehabilitation Facility eventually for fairly minor infractions. The punishments are not much of a deterrent now, but that will change.

There are security checkpoints throughout the verse wherever you access facilities or travel between systems, they are not active now but they will be. DNA tech means that facial recognition will be a thing.

There will be a reputation system and character history that will not only affect how NPC's treat you but also affect what work you can undertake and places you can go. Serving your time for a crime will not remove the history of criminal behaviour from your log.

There are levels of social status: 'no status within the UEE', Civilian of the UEE, Citizen of the UEE. Citizenship can be revoked by the UEE even if you have paid for it or earned it. A criminal history will cause citizenship to be revoked. "Service Guarantees Citizenship". Citizens pay less tax, they can vote in Imperator and Senatorial elections, citizens in good standing with UEE can own and operate 'essential to the UEE' production nodes.

A history of military service. There is no way to join the services except by starting Squadron 42. During military service you gain training and licenses / security clearances which will determine which ships you are legally allowed to own and operate in UEE controlled systems. Certain UEE systems will require you to have a clean rep and/or security clearances. Certain equipment and access to databases will likewise be restricted and this will affect what contracts you can undertake from the UEE agencies.

When you consider that a history of lawless behaviour will restrict your access to services, locations, military grade equipment, work contracts and possibly in-verse events it will occur to many that style of play carries too high a price even if they are willing to serve their sentence.

Star Citizen will not be an 'anything goes' no rules type of MMO. The UEE is a militaristic empire, they will not allow unfettered access to equipment or services that could become a threat to the UEE forces by undesirables, they will not be allowed to disrupt vital trade routes. The oft quoted 9 to 1 ratio is only an average. Players will be the minority just about everywhere they go. If the lore of a place says it is heavily populated they would not reduce the NPC population to 90 just because there are only 10 players in that location.

Comparing Star Citizen to other games serves no purpose, it will not be like other games and it won't even be anything like the current Alpha.

We got some information about Squadron 42 from Chris Roberts and Richard Tyrer at the end of the last digital CitizenCon - 2hrs and 16 minutes long.

Work on player and NPC animations on ladders and mantling.
Fighting creatures.
The new EVA
AI search and cooperate / environment aware tech.
Short, medium and long range scanning with Quantum Boost - no QT marker required.

..are the ones that spring to mind.

er... apparently you and your Org are participating in Jumptown. 
 
 So.. what? Self termination?

Empathy toward the player base as a whole should include helping the development team to get all network issues bug fixed and ironed out surely? After all it's possible that some of that future player base hasn't even signed up yet.

What we know they are working on:

NPC's will be environment aware, they will have personal histories, preferences and back stories. They all have a 24 hour day schedule.

They have done work (It was mentioned in an ISC and on the Progress Tracker) on making procedurally generated facial movements using data from wave files. CIG have already mentioned their interest in text to synthetic speech, but have been non-committal about it probably because it would include negotiating licenses with third parties. They did recommend Voice Attack with HCS Voice Packs and featured it on an Around The Verse if memory is correct. Voice Attack takes pre-written dialogue and uses the pre-recorded audio files to generate voice responses locally on the players machine. It can also use the local Microsoft TTS API to produce audio from text files.

We have VOIP and the resultant streaming of audio data.

They have done extensive work to make Render To Texture for real time face to face communications between NPC's and players. In the Squadron 42 vertical slice mission with directors commentary Chris states that the holographic call between Sato khan and Captain White is being streamed live and if you could get to Sato Khan's lair while the call was in progress you could photobomb that call. Odd thing to say? eh? Normally in single player games that call would be simulated by an in-place animation, not real time.

About Chat GPT in Skyrim:
ChatGPT makes written content for NPC's that is fed into the dialogue box wheel of possible responses in the modded versions of Skyrim. A script* is written by either Bethesda or the modder (I know because I've used the Skyrim Creation Kit) so that when certain dialogues are chosen it either opens up scripts for certain actions or closes down scripts or certain actions, I am not aware that scripts can be written 'on the fly' while the game executable is running so it's difficult to see how ChatGPT can be used to trigger scripts 'live', I am willing to be educated on the matter I suppose the script tags could be included in the dialogue written by Chat GPT, but from what I can see it will just include pre-written (by Chat GPT) and stored text responses specific for triggering scripts along with some general chit chat responses.

I know that normally audio files for voiced dialogue have to be loaded into the Skyrim directory tree prior to running the game executable, again I'm unaware if any modders have created an on demand text-to-speech API hook up (I'm Googling it to find out). All modded Skyrim V NPC's have voice acted pre-recorded files to play voice audio. I have written and recorded audio using voice changing software for characters in Skyrim V, I didn't release them as mods for others to use. I've also recorded audio for Voice Attack to use as responses using online TTS and voice changing software.

Skyrim V is not a dynamic world, nothing happens unless the player is present and interacting all in-game entity change states are recorded locally on the players save game file. Star Citizen is planned to be dynamic, things will happen even when players aren't around in a permanently running parallel background simulation of the game world - Quantum, this is a part of the reason why full persistence is required. Occasionally the dev team talk about 'game masters' for Star Citizen, this is what that means, dynamic on demand events they can plug into the game as it is running. NPC's will react to and talk about those dynamic events going on in the game world, they will also have access to the players history and reputation. They will respond to such things as the contents of the Spectrum. Some may remember the last Imperator election, we were told the AI population votes in Imperator elections, so somehow they are aware of the political 'goings on' and presumably they would be vocal about them.

Future possibility:
From an injection of text content for NPC's to yak about Chat GPT would be somewhat superfluous in Star Citizen because the NPC's already have a CIG generated database planned. If CIG do use the Microsoft TTS API to convert the contents of that database to wave files on demand then far from being left behind they would be ahead of the current capability of ChatGPT because it would be inbuilt for NPC's to give dynamic voice responses appropriately.

The real question is: Will players be able to use the Microsoft voice recognition API to input into the game as Voice Attack does? If they can do that then all of Voice Attacks functionality would be native to the game, but unlike VA if they could stream in text data to that API then you have a natural voice to voice interaction possible with NPC's appropriate to the whole game world.

We'll just have to wait and see, but there must be some reason they are going to the trouble of researching wave file to facial animation capability, even if it is to mass produce facial animation for NPC's to use. FOIP for NPC's? At a previous CitizenCon in 2018 they demonstrated how all NPC's can use any facial animation created for any character because of the standardised DNA tech they have created. If they use a combination of voice altering software (readily available) from recorded wave files, or even streamed audio, they can create a multitude of voices to deliver the same dialogue with the same facial animation, they just need to build a text database of all possible responses (I suppose they could use ChatGPT for that, but why bother?).

My estimate of what they seem to be doing, or planning, is making audio responses procedural ie CIG's usual approach to making mass production for consumption. One of the databases that NPC's will probably have access to is the Galactapedia. If they did create a mammoth database of recorded audio to be played locally on the players game client the game download would be gigantic, so a steamed on demand audio approach (like VOIP for NPC's) would seem to make more sense.

*Scripts refers to machine code - iirc written in Python using Boolean logic.

EDIT
It appears they have indeed made a hook up TTS mod for Skyrim V.

Buoyancy, waves, boats and swimming were all on the Roadmap Progress Tracker slated for both Squadron 42 and the PU. So expect to see it first in Squadron 42. The work on waves was mentioned in the last monthly reports. Yes, according to the information given about the Origin 890 Jump at concept, it is supposed to be able to float on water.

They have explained this only twice on video, so it's not surprising some may have missed it.

The issue is Raymarching they do a quite frankly insane amount of shooting out rays to sample pixels for draw calls, hence all the beautiful screenshots of sunrises and sunsets, the draw calls have too much detail out to great distance because the rays are sampling at multiple depths - thousands of kilometers and multiple translucent layers - which is unheard of, way further than other games and even flight simulators do. MSFS and X-Plane have the same issues and they have nowhere near the same level of ground detail that this game has, they use cell technology and LOD's (the further away the lower the resolution and they don't do transparency at lower resolution LOD's so their rays don't penetrate beyond the first few layers ie a few hundred kilometres, they also use global illumination to an extent that SC does not). They have ideas for fixing it, which sounds kinda smart in a 'no compromises' sort of way, but those ideas will not be worth attempting or implementing until the full Gen12 renderer is in. Once that happens they can start to optimise.

They have also mentioned the solutions they plan are for the next generation of hardware beyond todays - so if someone is playing the game on a 2000 series, or even a 3000 series mid range GPU they will realise that they are 3 or more generations back from what is intended for the final release. Harsh I know, but there it is. I fully expect minimum specs will be for an 8c/16t CPU, 3080 or 6800 XT with a minimum of 12GB VRAM and 32GB RAM.

I agree. They should make the reclaim times on fighters / gun ships 5 hours and spawn them with no weapons and components. /s

It's not fair to punish the poor meek, what are they gonna do when we inherit the universe huh? Huh?

Master Mode will be for high speed short range travel. QT will only be for long range travel. So no, they don't need a QT drive, they need the new flight system they have in Squadron 42 for testing.

Some may not be aware, currently only maneuvering thrusters work, the main engines glow is for show - the main engines are more powerful but they aren't active in the game yet.

They do have a clean up system, it's called the Density Manager - it was explained by M. Bausejour of Turbulent. Of course it will need some adjustment to fit the current circumstances once they have the network issues sorted.

As others have said above we all currently in a fish bowl but it won't remain that way forever. We've put up with worse 'pro tem' issues.

I'm looking forward to Starfield, I played Skyrim V for years, but the idea that is on the same scale and has the same scope of Star Citizen is just a non-starter. It doesn't have persistence beyond the player game save, there is no way you could describe it as a 'Living Breathing Universe'.

Ha ha ha... We already know that isn't the case from what Todd Howard has told us himself.

100 star systems, each with a loading screen to get to, and a loading screen to land and take off.

100 star systems and "4 fully built cities you can explore". A whopping 4 in the whole game!

Starfield is a single-player game, with scripted story line side missions and crafting just like Skyrim V.

He told us they are using a modified version of Creation Engine , and when he talks about those modifications the most prominent thing he mentions is being able to 'use ladders'.

He did talk about being able to land anywhere on planets, which is cool, but did anyone listen to how they actually achieve this? They are using a modified version of the cell system they use in Skyrim V. The cell system for Skyrim V (unmodded) used blocks of 4GB to load into RAM your surroundings all objects NPC's etc, if you stand in the middle of a cell only that cell and the cells immediately adjacent to yours are loaded into RAM - thus there is no long range gameplay possible - you won't be doing a lot of 'Hard Flying' over thousands of kilometres of terrain without heavy RAM loading in (leading to popping in), which is why there is minimal atmospheric flight planned in Starfield. Have they shown us any video of ships flying over planetary surfaces at speed, don't you think they would have if they could?

With the new system you'll have to choose a landing spot on the planet and that landing spot cell is loaded while in the flight down to surface - ergo, a loading screen. They don't have Object Container Streaming in the same way Star Citizen does. They are using the same type of technology used in Everspace 2 and No Mans Sky. It was actually the same technology originally planned for Star Citizen but dropped when procedural planets became a possibility in 2016. So, from a Star Citizen perspective it is out of date abandoned technology.

Given that the focus of testing is Persistent Entity Streaming, what would be the point of introducing the new flight model for large scale player testing right now?

Yes, every step, not every minute. Sharing is giving information, that doesn't necessarily mean putting it out into a game build.

Actually it does. Or rather it takes a mass of players to reproduce those issues, because those player commands are not executed client side first. The player command to get out of your seat or ATC request goes to the server first, this causes a 'change state' to be made via the backend network, once that change state is recorded the effect is then sent back to the players game client and you see the result of it. Same with the ASOP terminals.

They are aware they are having outages, it's on the status page. They have been working on it even over the weekend.

Will that personal medical elderly care staff or electric wheelchairs to push them onto the stage? 


You have no idea what the remuneration rates are at CIG, this is an assumption you have made. They also do not have a problem recruiting all up the ladder more than any other game developer. If you had watched the introduction to the new Montreal Team you would know that - that team came from other more established game development companies and they were fairly experienced. A significant proportion of the dev team have all worked for other game development companies, there is nothing stopping them leaving to find a different job if they want to. They now have more than one team working in Montreal which is a hot-bed region for game developers, so the competition is high. They recruit young for a reason told to me by Jared Huckaby, which has more to do with that they find that those who have worked for the more traditional development companies can often bring ideas and practises that don't fit with the ethos of a community driven project. Most adapt, but not all of them.

Whether you know it or not you are pushing the misinformation of the FUDspreaders here who when they couldn't halt the inflow of players and supporters tried to change tactics to poison the well for possible future recruits to the project. They have no evidence for their claims, they have made false assumptions from bits of gossip.

I am a retired drug and alcohol addiction counsellor, if someone lies to me or tries to evade giving an answer I know it. I talked to Jared Huckaby at a BarCitizen last year - alone. I asked him straight out "Did we do a good thing? Or has it all become too corporate now?" I could read from his face, he was shocked by the idea - he said No, the company has expanded but the original 'all one family together' ethos has not changed at all. If you go look there is an interview with a former employee of CIG who got into difficulty, they supported him throughout his difficulty for several months until he was capable of returning to work... and that was in the USA.

There is no other game development company that allows dev team members unrestricted access to it's community of players the way Chris Roberts does, and they know it.

I have met quite a few of the dev team members several times since Dec 2015, they are more than happy to tell anyone they love working at CIG, they have opportunities to stay longer with the company and develop their skills rather than years of working for the corporates who'll lay them off for a cost-cutting exercise. Normally in the industry they have to go job-hopping to get a promotion or take a drop to go learn different skillsets. At CIG they don't have to do that, they get internally promoted and can even switch roles within the company. They consider it the best career choice they ever made from what they've told me. Yes, some do move on, they may have personal reasons for that. It happens in all walks of professional life but we don't get to know the dev team members from other companies do we?

The physicalisation of everything is important for the overall experience, but it isn't the only part of this game universe that will both surprise and captivate.

There is a tendency to give the same weight to information CIG gives out, especially about their priorities, and not really take it all in full context. For example we all know that server meshing is coming and it is seen as one more step toward the finished game, whatever people perception of that is - but actually the absolutely necessary tech to make the planned game universe isn't quite so linear.

If server meshing were to somehow not become a reality they can still split off servers by having loading screens during QT and Jump Gates, no-one would want that but overall it wouldn't unduly adversely affect the planned gameplay experience - this is the shortcut Bethesda are making with Starfield. When you make a single player game, which is basically a version of Skyrim with a different genre, the player save game is the stand in for full persistence but it doesn't allow any evolution. All the other stuff like FOIP/VOIP, DNA tech, etc are icing on the cake, the sort of icing on the cake that doesn't get done with game publishers usually because their attitude is that while core tech is being made they'll just lay off teams not involved in the core tech to save money. This community said loud and clear, there's no need for that type of practise we'll keep supplying the necessary support, you just keep making it better.

The absolutely essential to the plan for the Star Citizen gameplay experience tech pillars are/were:
64bit precision
Spherical grid planets / moons
Nested physics grids within physics grids
Object Container Streaming
Server Object Container Streaming
Full Persistence

What will be unique about Star Citizen is that it will be a living breathing ever evolving 'feel real' universe, where the players aren't the main driving force and there is nothing like that out there. The game you play in all the other games mentioned is the same game universe every single day you play from the first to the last. Yes you may progress in that game universe, there may be large groups of players affecting that game universe, but it's the same universe. Full persistence was required to make this evolution over time a possibility, it touches everything and allows everything . All the other stuff like aging ships, parts wearing out they just naturally fall out of that system, they are obvious addons when the capability allows.

This is the difference between CIG's approach to making a game, they make systems that allow many opportunities and expansion rather than sitting down writing a fixed script and sticking to that doggedly until the end. It's a completely different approach. Rather than saying - what does our budget and current tech allow, they think in terms of what would we ultimately like the freedom to do? What underpinning tech do we need that would allow that? OK - let's look into that rather than rushing to get a product to market ASAP and satisfying investors. Star Citizen doesn't have to make big profits after release, there are no investors waiting with their hands out, whatever revenue the games bring in goes right back into those games. It's uniqueness is that it is self-funding for as long as the player community wishes it to be so.

The community bought that freedom to explore the possible and that is what makes this project unique, the dedicated support of it's community. Chris could have gone with the traditional investor/publisher route, but he knew if he trusted the community and his team he could do so much more for the people who want that ultimate experience.

Star Citizen (and to an extent Squadron 42) is not planned to be 'a' game it is going to be all games in one, whatever activity you can do in any other game of any genre there will be a version of it in Star Citizen because all the core features for all those games have been built in from the start. You can play Deus EX and there is a half basketball court and a basketball in the game, but you can't actually do much with it, it's set decoration. When they make a basketball court for the Javelin, you know they will make sure you can do something with it eventually, because that's how they roll. When they put out in wheeled vehicles they know what players will do with them, so they make racetracks, not because it was part of some big plan but because they could while they wait for other teams to finish their work.

Part of the reason people like working at CIG is that they know they won't get laid off work when priorities shift focus, they'll be allowed to explore different avenues and this allows them to progress in their careers. It gives them a sense of loyalty toward the project.

I'm looking forward to Starfield, I played Skyrim for many hundreds of hours, but it will not affect how people respond to Star Citizen - quite the opposite it might bring Skyrim fans into the genre who will then look at the hugely expansive role playing opportunities of Star Citizen. I have to smile at the reference to Elite Dangerous, if it's such a 'finished game' why are it's player number dwindling to less than 4000? Why have so many ED players and streamers switched and come over to Star Citizen even in it's unfinished state? It's because they know it is coming to 'end of life' there's no more plans to develop it for console, and no further statement of plans to expand it for PC.

There is an assumption made that Chris had a vision of a game (much more limited in scope than currently, basically the same thing as Starfield is going to be) and that after that game was made there wouldn't be any expansion of that game, but that isn't the case, it was always the plan to keep expanding it. When he realised certain things became possible that he couldn't have known in the earliest days he realised that core technology would allow that expansion to a greater degree sooner and doing it earlier would mean not having to rewrite everything when it came to expanding the game experience.They did release a playable game in Dec 2015 that had more features than the planned original even if it was much much smaller in scope.

If you're wanting a discussion about character slots and their potential sales you have to have that discussion within the wider context of the plan for this project.

This speaks to the character of the game, it is not about simply acquiring things it is about living an experience. You can choose what experience you want in the game universe, those who want to can have variety in their experience. You may find that you've taken your player character in a direction and it has had unintended (by you) consequences, you may decide to start again with a new character. There is no replay for choices you make, it is intended that for both Squadron 42 and the PU those choices once made have long lasting consequences. Players will be spending a lot of time pawing over and scrutinising, and even comparing their characters histories. In Squadron 42 you don't play a named character, you play your own character taking a role in history. Hence the 'Lieutenant' problem.

You're not paying for a game, you're paying for the right to create unique characters, each with their own unique histories in the whole Star Citizen / Squadron 42 universe.

Many assume and espouse the idea that this game project will not take an approach that is different to traditional games, but it will. Full persistence isn't just about coffee cups and salvaging, it's about a full living breathing universe that evolves over time. This is a radically different idea to just about any other game where the game world experience is the same on day 1 as it will be on day 3651. You will live a life in this game universe, you will become emotionally attached to characters and invested in not just your own characters but the wider living breathing universe of characters who also evolve over time - there are no Heimskr's in Star Citizen. The current mission givers are placeholders for the alpha.

Normally in-game these organising structures, and the personalities in them, are faceless entities you only really have any contact with through lore, they are remote an unchanging, but that is not the plan for Star Citizen. You will see these top tier characters reacting to events in the game universe as well as all the lower tier characters. This is a monumental undertaking and is part of the reason many insist that it will never happen - nevertheless that has been the plan.

If you ever get into a real face to face discussion to talk about such things with the development team (as I have) and ask about this they will take a deep breath and look off and say, there's nothing like it, it's beyond anything ever thought of before but they can't talk details and so get a little lost for words about describing exactly how it is different. it's a fundamentally different approach to the gaming experience. Star Citizen is not a space ship game, it is a life simulator in a fictional universe.

When Chris talks about this plan he describes it like being able to actually live in the fictional universes of the likes of Star Trek or Star Wars.

Star Citizen is going to be the role-players dream game, it is being designed from the ground up to have wide appeal not just to space pilots, it will be fine for casual players, but it's the role players whose minds will be blown. It will be a 24 hour, 7 day a week, 52 weeks of the year evolving experience where there is always something happening and no single player can experience it all, both because you won't have long enough, but also because you can't be logged in 24/7 and you can't be everywhere at once, but you will see it all happening on multiple platforms (mobiles and web) 24 hours per day on the Spectrum. He knows that it will be the social media and content streaming media's dream game because there will always be many new things and events to talk about and show off.

Character slots are about player agency and choice, they aren't primarily about gameplay mechanics. Some are going to become so immersed in the game universe they will appear to not know the difference between the game and their own real lives, because the game with all it's events and characters will seem totally real to them.

Of course it will also be the 'jobbing actor's' dream project too, endless work.

Star Citizen will never be 'finished' in the same sense that other games are finished - with that same fixed experience throughout, it will continue to expand and evolve. This is why in the early days people said Chris Roberts was just plain crazy, yet here we are at the dawn of one the major tech pillars that will make all that possible.

This not just about 'Agent Smithing' or building your own preferred crew. Your characters will die eventually.

Everything is going to be reputation based - more specifically than faction based there will be social status, It's not just ships and weapons. Accessing services and even places you are allowed to go will depend on that mixture of social status, player history and faction reputation.

The political structure of the game will be important, indeed it will set the overall tone for the game. Players will be very aware they are living under a militaristic empire with several social structures and forces that maintain those structures. It's comparable to living in a country with both federal laws and state laws. It will not be allowed for the average player, or indeed lawless players, to easily gain or continue to own and use ships and equipment that can challenge government forces. A few player owned civilian access ships taking down Idrises and Javelins is a temporary Alpha thing.

Many things will change, the security gates will become active, there will be military security checkpoints in certain star systems. In a CitizenCon around 2017 or 2018 Tony Zurovec talked about this, there will be hand held facial recognition scanners, which will also be active at every point of entry and even space stations.

Right now combat is merely opportunistic or a simple mission open to all via a ladder of tiered components and weapons but in the future the 'hunt' part will have tools like engine signature tracking. They do leave clues to their future plans but if you aren't paying attention they are easily missed - like when you are leaving the KRF the guy refers to you as 'civilian' because it is intended that for certain crimes your citizenship can be revoked. If you don't start Squadron 42 with your PU character citizenship will not be easy to get, it is a thing of value with rights and privileges attached. When you get missions for the Advocacy they use the term 'with the relevant experience', currently everyone qualifies, but it won' be that way forever.

The only way you will be able to gain ex-military status is by joining the military, and the only way you can do that is by starting Squadron 42. If you retire your Squadron 42 character to the PU your player history such as training and security clearances go with you. You will have to get to a certain level in Squadron 42 to have the right to own and operate the F8C Lightning for example (in the Squadron 42 Q&A Chris referred to this as a 'badge', notice you don't get the ship free, only the badge), if you don't you won't be able to legally own and operate the F8C in the game in areas controlled by the UEE. The 'rich' (higher level concierge) will get special dispensation to own and operate the F8C because they have demonstrated well above average loyalty to the UEE. This same approach will apply to other tools and features in the game not just ships, weapons and components.

During the CitizenCon presentation where Hurston was first revealed Chris talked about these privileged access places when they walked past the Chairman's Club Lounge, he said there will also be clubs for ex-military personnel, certain mission types and things you can acquire etc will be locked behind those secured access doors.

Your reputation will also affect your ability to use the AI to assist you. There is to be a UEE wide security database with privileged access only for those the empire trusts.

The current system of no long term consequence to choices (or mistakes) you make will not last, once you have a criminal record it stays even after you have served your time. It won't just be the availability of ships, weapons and components that will be a factor - some things will only be legal to own and use according to your status. Supplying equipment and services to those not entitled to them will be considered a crime. You may have no criminal record but if you acquired equipment you aren't licensed to own or operate that can be confiscated if you go into areas the UEE controls. Yes, players will have to get used to losing things. This is the reason why there are non-aligned systems, faction systems and UEE aligned systems. It's not just some vague 'colour' that's only of interest to those who want immersion, it will be an integral part of the gameplay experience.

During testing there is no need for this privileged strata of access, it gets in the way of widescale testing, but that will change. Currently we all enjoy automatic citizenship, and assumed ex-military status, in the only UEE aligned system we have access to, but that's only temporary. In the future it's the players choice to live a life of restrictions or not. If you choose to enter the PU with a non-Squadron 42 character you will enter as a civilian with little history and privileges. People ask 'Will we be able to play as alien characters' and CIG staff are always vague about it with the usual answer - 'perhaps eventually'. The reason for this is because if you chose to be a character from a non-UEE aligned system you have no official status within the UEE, you can't even be a civilian. Since the Tevarin war the Tevarin have had a long running political fight with the UEE for legal recognition, there is only 1 Tevarin UEE Senator, you have to be a citizen in order to vote in UEE elections.

In the early days before all that people could talk about was ships Chris was asked what the game universe will be like - he said it would be similar to the Roman Empire during it's decline. It is a time of almost constant wars on the borders. There will be competing political factions fighting against the UEE with all the secrecy and intrigue that brings, there will be elitism, extreme poverty, there will be lawlessness, slavery and racism, there will be both population control and flow of resources control. The empire will be trying to maintain it's grip on what it controls. Expect a lot of propaganda and rules to follow, with harsh punishment for those that don't follow the rules. "Service Guarantees Citizenship".

Acquiring 'things' is not the endgame - your status within the game universe is to be the driving factor. The ultimate endgame Chris Roberts envisions is for people to live a life of renown and have experiences they will remember.

You see what I mean? The percentage numbers are not important they are just educated guesses, the scale factors and motivations are what is important.

Let's say for example: The game universe is only Pyro and Stanton. No new activities are added. Pyro is 3 times the size of the Stanton system in volume.

Stanton: There are 4 planets with landing zones and an average of 10 outposts each, 6 rivers and 12 caves on each rocky planet (2), 12 moons with average 5 outposts, 6 caves. 19 space stations, 1 asteroid base. 1 Jump Gate.

There's no point in counting the vast open space because once someone is out there the chances of an encounter are nil. Miners will go to the Aaron Halo - which is huge. Once they are out there the chances of being found are virtually zero.

Pyro: Have to be conservative here because we don't know exactly - 6 planets with 8 outposts each, 6 moons average 5 outposts, average of 3 rivers and 4 caves. 6 space stations. 1 Ruin Station base. 1 Jump Gate.

That's 361 POI's for Stanton and Pyro combined - where players could go.

So you tell me what you estimate each group of players is doing in a 24 hour day of play:

How many players per shard per 24 hours? .....

How long is the average play time per player? ..... hours

How many players will multicrew in a ship with 4 players? ....

How many players will multicrew in a ship with 3 players? ....

How many players will multicrew with 2 players? ....

How many players will be solo piloting their ships? .....

What ratio of lawful players to unlawful players will there be? ..../.....

What is the ratio of new players who haven't learnt evasion skills versus those experienced players who have? ..../.....

How many will stay in 'no fire zones' in main planet landing zones, in their own hangars or habs or going shopping etc? ....

How long will players spend in planetary landing zones? ....

How many will be out on planetary or moon outposts in no fire zones? ....

How long will players stay in no fire zones at outposts? .... minutes

How long will players going between outposts be in space between those outposts? .... minutes

How many will be going racing competing or spectating? ....

How long will they spend racing /at the races? ....

How many will be going mining? ...

How long will those miners be out in deep space mining? ..... minutes

How long will those miners be in open space near POI's or between POI's? .... minutes

How many will go do salvaging? ....

How long will they spend salvaging?.... minutes

How long will the players doing salvaging be in open space between POI's? ... minutes

How many players will be doing trading runs? (they can buy from miners and salvagers out in space so that they don't have to come in to POI's) ....

How long will traders spend in space between POI''s? .....minutes

How long will traders spend in no fire zones buying or selling cargo? ..... minutes

How many are going to go do cave missions? .....

How long will those going into caves spend in those caves? .... minutes

How many are going to spend their play time on a river or other open water? .....

How long will it take players to go from their hangar to get to the river or open water? .... minutes

How many are going to go hunting / trekking / camping away from landing zones or outposts? ....

How long will they spend in open space getting from their hangar to those places on planets they find fun to explore? ....minutes

How many are going to be out in deep space exploring? .....

How long are they going to be out exploring deep space? ..... minutes

How long around space stations or exiting a planet before they jump to QT to go exploring deep space? .... minutes

How many players will bed log in and out far away from all POI's? .....

How long will unlawful players spend getting supplies and be visiting points of interest? ..... minutes

How long will unlawful players wait for a victim in any location? .... minutes

How long will unlawful players spend fighting with the victim and transferring the loot? .... minutes

How long will unlawful players spend travelling between their base and where they plan to catch their victims? .... minutes

How long will unlawful players spend in custody? .... minutes

How long will unlawful players spend evading law enforcement? ....minutes

What ratio of lawful players will evade an attack by an unlawful player once an encounter occurs? ...../.....

What ratio of NPC / player encounters does an unlawful player expect to have? ..../....

These are all scale factors and this list is not exhaustive, for every activity or new POI CIG adds the ratio of players in open areas where they are vulnerable and have anything worth taking goes down, especially if they put those activities in safe zones. The majority of the ones I've listed reduce your chances of a successful encounter, CIG only have to change a few variables to affect those scale factors by a significant margin. Players only have to learn a few basic skills or behaviours to significantly reduce the chances of an encounter, like staying out of the populated trade lanes or watching the comms for any reported pirate activity and avoiding that area. Once a pirate shows themselves they are vulnerable to security forces and bounty hunters. Once a pirate haunt is discovered the pirate is now vulnerable to reprisal attacks. There's more but word count won't allow.

While I applaud your attempt at detail and collecting some information, I know the effort that goes into a post that long, you are at least bearing in mind some future plans. The big sigh and facepalm this post deserves is still incoming...

Star Citizen is not merely a conflict-centric game, it will have it, but not in the volume people think it will have it. The game is sensitive to what is happening and where. Threat levels will be constantly monitored. Since the advent of procedural planetary tech it isn't even going to be a primarily space ship game. Those who think it is need to get up to date, it's not 2014 anymore. The way they are building it is so that it can be ALL games in one game, as such it will draw in players from all game genres. The majority will unlikely be interested in an us versus them type game.

Those who do want aggressive type gameplay will fall into two categories:

Those who want to live outside the law - with all the disadvantages and consequences that will bring, it won't be easy.

Those who like the aggressive type gameplay but don't want the punishment of lawlessness consequences, they will act on the side of the law enforcers.

Now it's just a game of numbers which CIG can balance:

75% want a peaceful life doing their thing - farming simulator, miners, salvagers, race drivers, engine tuners, those who want the wild outdoors Cabellas Deer Hunter type experience, the explorers, the Uber drivers and pizza box delivery, the shipping magnate who owns a fleet, the Genesis Starliner owner who wants a lucrative regular route, the wannabe trillionaire playboy in his mansion with lots of servants, the sports players etc. If there are far more varied activities that don't involve going around shooting at people then that is what will draw the players in that direction.

15% decide they like the shooty-type stuff but don't like spending all their time running and hiding or on Quarterdeck Prison planet, they like having access to top of the line frontline mil-spec equipment that needs a good rep with the UEE and full citizenship - so they'll get their work from the Advocacy, which again requires a spotless reputation, and get their pew pew jollies in Squadron 42 as well building up their security clearances to get the really interesting UEE and Advocacy contracts. You understand that CIG owns the bank? They can offer unlimited bounties if they want to, and they'll just keep upping the rewards until they get the balance they want.

10% decide they are going to play on the lawless side but at least half of them are sick of the hassle so they are just gonna play the shady and be drug pushers, fences, suppliers to naughty boys for a big mark-up. Finding all the backdoors and skulking around avoiding the boys in blue. Scrupulously avoiding anything that could destroy their spotless reputation as much as possible.

5% want Jack Sparrow action no matter what it takes, so some of the time they are going after the lawful players, some of the time they are fighting the lawful players that are hunting them down and the other 90% of the time they are running and hiding, trying to find resources they can't get from legal supplies at prices they struggle to afford - no insurance, no bank loans. They don't care that they can't attend any big events like Murray Cup Racing, or the IAE - yeah yeah.. they know that a few days in the pokey won't wipe their reputation clean anymore like the good old days but they'll put up with that. Piracy is one-dimensional boring and repetitive gameplay, you can go off and do other things some of the time if you're really clever, or you have an alt account, but for every minute you're not doing piracy - you don't exist as a problem.

So you play for 4 hours 5 days a week with a group of 5 of you, you're 'on target' doing your pirate stuff for around 25% of that time that's 1 hour a day and it takes 20 minutes per event, you've got to make it profitable you can't just shoot'n'scoot, that means your victims are 3 per 4 hour day - 90% of them are NPC's that means an average of 0.3 players getting your little groups 'special' attention per day. It's hardly a terrifying statistic is it? The average player will have no encounter with you for 99.7% of the time.

Now factor in that a massive population of NPC's is going to dilute all the above populations to the point they are but a tiny minority each in their own sea of activity that is this diverse game universe. 90% is just an average, the game will be populated according to what is happening and where, if there's 2 players in the city of Prime they won't populate it with 18 NPC's. The more lucrative, entertaining and strategically important to the UEE's flow of goods the larger the NPC population.

..and of course the final big one - SPACE IS MASSIVE, NO - LIKE, REALLY REALLY MASSIVE. Anybody with 2 functioning brain cells will learn how to sidestep the trouble spots pretty quick. If you're avoiding the high security populated areas as is only sensible you'll have to wait around for hours in some places before you come across anybody and most of the time that 'anybody' is going to be an NPC. Each 'anybody' you interfere with is potentially going to ramp up your bounty to the point that now the 'anybody' isn't some random player or NPC, it's a group of bounty hunters who've laid a nice juicy looking trap for tired old, bored old you that is nothing but a satisfying payday for them before they head off to that tropical island getaway where they have to go through 10 security checkpoints and 3 military checkpoints to get to, or the winter sports wonderland, to enjoy the fruits of their labour. You get prison or if you're lucky you get to slink off to some rundown space station in the middle of nowhere-ville.

The impression 'pirates' give is of brainless grinning simpletons who can't do basic mathematics, or pay attention and use their imaginations to think ahead. They walk through all the current security checkpoints that aren't activated and don't think - huh maybe one day they will be active. They have no idea what this project is going to become - it's a massive fully immersed as true to life as it gets simulator, with a militaristic political structure.

The very very few who don't fall into that category of grinning simpletons with itchy trigger fingers might make a go of being a pirate, but there will be precious few of them, and they will have the brains not to hang around too long in areas that are distinctly hostile to them. They'll go off and dreamily remember what fun it was when the whole game universe was the size of a goldfish bowl with no security to speak of and no long term consequences - and even then the majority of players never noticed they were there.

Those who think they can bring a few friends might get away with it a couple of times, but each time the force sent to deal with them will get bigger and bigger - because unlike the deluded grinners the game can bring an endless supply of resources depending on how much trouble they think you are. If you're barely a flea bite on a cats behind why should anybody care about you? If they see you once a year and your sorry 'civilian only second-hand scavenged repair job' ship can't do much but drag it's ass while most players figured out if I at least start Squadron 42 and keep my Citizenship and reputation clean I can get all the best gear. You do know that citizenship is revoked when you have a criminal record? The UEE won't trust just anybody with equipment that can challenge it's frontline security forces, don't rely on those ASOP terminals, they're only for the law abiding. Next time you're in Klescher pay attention to what the man is saying as you leave, he refers to you as 'civilian' not citizen.

So because - again - we have the PvE v PvP argument brought up, yet again ignoring the known facts of the case I'm sorry but you get a Picard AND this...

But it's all good fun and nobody wants a completely boring life do they?

They won't have separate servers for anybody.. because.. there's absolutely no need for them. CIG have the powers of a god in this game, they can close jump gates, increase security where-ever and whenever they wish, cause natural disasters, famines and shortages. Even pirates gotta eat.

There is a clean up system - it's called the Density Manager - of course it depends how high the tolerance is set for density of the entities, which is something they will tweak over time. It also allows other gameplay elements to come in and help solve the problem like full ship salvaging, janitors, tractor beam technology and even player missions to collect junk and take it to the incinerator. Some say isn't it terrible that gowns are left all over the place - no it isn't terrible it makes the place more unique and gives a sense of character. A run down place has it's character, a well maintained and pristine place has it's character it's just that players aren't used to it, they are used to games loading a set pristine 'stock' play space. CIG, by not using a standard 'solve problem' script are signalling their future intent toward the game universe as a whole.

Do we need full persistence?

We do if we want the most realistic immersive experience possible. Especially for the experience of calling a place in the game universe 'home'. Or base building. Even the engaging occupation of simply managing all your assets to suit your activities relies on persistence. A player can stamp their character on that part of the game universe in ways not usually open to gamers, whether they intend it or not. If someone is messy, lazy and disorganised in real life they may well exhibit those same characteristics in the game. How many games are there were you can hire a house maid? How many games are there were a player can offer a house maid service? The plan is to physicalise everything, the inventory system will not continue in it's current form, it's just placeholder technology for now.

We do if we want to prioritise player agency over purely scripted activity. How would players create missions and activities for other players without full persistence? Sure more capabilities and player tools would be required, but once you have the core tech there is so much that falls out of it for not much more work, in some cases no dev work at all. Chris is all about player agency and players creating content for other players in this vast expansive game universe, expect more of it to come. Don't under-estimate how many game players out there there are who want to role-play just about anything. Star Citizen aims to be a life simulator, not just a space ship game, if a player wants to role play a Feng Shui expert for player homes, they can. The amount of player agency is what sets this game apart from other vast expanse open world games, with it there is a sense of place and history, a sense of ownership and belonging.

Persistence is not limited to player activity, it extends to the NPC AI population too which allows an ever-evolving game universe, somewhat unique in the massive open world game genre experience. A massive NPC population that doesn't just respond to player activity, it also responds to itself. It achieves what so few other massive open world games don't, it makes the game universe seem alive with activity. More real.

There are those who somewhat short-sightedly insist that Star Citizen will have niche appeal only to pilots, pew pew merchants and mercenary types. They don't understand what is coming so they cannot fathom the idea that eventually the players who don't want to fly a ship, carry a gun or kill anyone will out-number those that do. That is the game universe full persistence and full physicalisation allows. When the wider gaming world finally understands what this project is all about it will draw in players from all game genre types. There will be new game genres that people haven't even thought of yet.

...and how many other game promo's misrepresent the capabilities of their game with marketing material, promising a future experience rather than the current iteration? This is not new in the industry, it's standard practise. Watch the Carrack commercial we know we won't have rock and rope climbing for a long time yet. It's aspirational not descriptive.

This is the sad truth of life, it's always a possibility and other games are not immune to the same effect. How many avid GTA fans will not make it to see GTA VI released? When I decided to support this project I knew my support will benefit future gamers more than it will me either directly or indirectly through longer term changes in the way future games are made.

I worked in the field of medical research prior to becoming a registered nurse and that discipline is well aware that the testing time from a new discovery of a treatment to the time it becomes available has this sad reality - some who could have benefited won't live to see it available as a treatment option, but there is no other safe choice than to follow protocol, which takes years. There are some very exciting developments currently in the field of medical research, particularly with regard to degenerative diseases, spinal cord injury and aging, which are going to change things dramatically in the next 10 to 20 years, by which time I'll be in my 70's and 80's - if I live that long.

Everyone at CIG are well aware of this and CIG customer services have shown some impressive levels of compassion toward those struggling with difficulties over the years.

Can't imagine what you're doing for that to happen, I rarely encounter anyone who shoots at me, and it's even rarer for them to actually kill me before I get away. Often I'll take all my guns and missiles off the ship. I can count on the fingers of one hand the number of times a player has killed me in the last year.

Methinks you could spend some productive time learning better tactics.

Here's a little tip or two, just the basics:

If you come out of a long QT run you'll have a long time to wait until your QT drive spools up again. Come out of QT 'early' before your destination by holding B. Practise until you can get to around 50K km from the POI destination, wait out the cool down and now when you do jump to the destination that you want your drive will be cooled down in a jiffy ready to jump out if there's trouble, don't wait to find out if the ships around you are hostile, just jump - anywhere pick the closest marker to your reticle, you can cancel it. Avoid the 'popular destinations' as much as you can.

If you get dragged out of QT, go to full boost to get to max speed as fast as possible, and decouple, head away from where the radar contacts are - go in a straight line. Once decoupled and at max speed turn and face the 'baddie', fire your missiles at him if he's within range and hitting you. He can't use his flares or noise effectively while he's coming at you and the closing rate between your missiles and him is higher than any weapons he sends your way, he has to turn away to avoid your weapons which means it's unlikely he will catch you up.. you can use your flares and noise without having to turn. If he is landing hits keep your ship spinning so that no shield takes the full force and goes down to nothing, don't touch the throttle (or W key) while spinning. Remember you're in decoupled mode, just let the ship go along the line you chose to get away, every time your nose comes round to face him just punch his nose again. If there are a few of them and the chase lasts long enough they'll have to line up behind each other, there's no other way they can overtake you.

Don't have power sent to things you don't intend to use and get yourself a fast recharging shield before anything else. Engines and shields on the power triangle. If you're already at max speed and coasting on decoipled mode push all power to the shields.

Don't fly in space in coupled mode it's wasteful and limiting.

If you are approaching a landing pad at an outpost on a planet or moon go decoupled if you aren't already, use the TVi to aim for the outpost don't go lower than 10K altitude until you are right over the outpost (point your nose at the horizon beyond the outpost to stop from descending), have your drive spooled and nose pointed at a QT marker and calibrated as you go down. If there's someone there just hold B and jump out. If you're too low to QT boost burn back to altitude as fast as you can and then jump out.

Don't dawdle around POI's get into the 'no fire' zone ASAP. You'll come out of QT usually around 22km out, boost to max speed toward the station use the TVi to make sure you aren't going to hit it. Once the no fire zone indicator comes on spin your ship 180 to face the aTVi and boost burn to slow down until you are slow enough to approach the hangar / pad.

When choosing the next ship to get go for the fastest you can afford, then the one with the most shield faces, then the one with the fastest QT cool down time.

Practise practise practise. The majority of the time these simple techniques should keep you out of trouble or get you out of trouble.

Hope that helps.

You do know the ground vehicle physics is currently being reworked for an upcoming patch? They've been using the basic vehicle CryEngine / Lumberyard physics and control set up to now from what I understand. They did mention the rework in a recent video. Vehicles don't have thrusters and ship engines so 'no IFCS', (actually ship main engines aren't enabled yet iirc, the engine nacelle burn is for show, we fly on thrusters, could check by turning off all the thrusters and seeing if you can move).

The time in development is not really relevant, priorities are. What should they prioritise among all the competing calls from the community? Or should they just work through it all with their own overall plan in mind? What's the point in critiquing a game known to be in an unfinished state (we do have the Issue Council).. you want to give Chris another chance to say.. "No shit, we know it isn't in yet". Accurate mass hasn't been enabled for anything yet, we're still awaiting the full cargo refactor.

Vehicles are working well enough right now to keep the majority happy. Daymar Rally entrants seem fine with what they have currently. They can never please everyone all the time. Some want more content prioritised, some want bug-fixing prioritised, but how many of them realise these two work against each other.

Right now the priority is the core tech pillars, CIG has made that abundantly clear.

So I guess it's a case of 'Duh, no shit Sherlock, hope you had fun doing all that thrashing around proving a known point'.

The current little sleepy backwater Alpha test-bed Stanton system with it's fractious little factions has no idea about the storm that is going to roll through the UEE systems. Go read the history wall of Hurston Dynamics, a major arms manufacturer for the UEE military, there is no mention of the Vanduul war on that wall - yet.

About a year ago now Jared Huckaby told me in person that the Terra Nova system was going to be the first Alpha test system for the PU, but they changed their minds. That's what all the initial work on Terra Prime landing zone and SataBall was all about. That's why there is a huge full wall mural of Terra Prime in the meeting room of the LA office that we've seen on CIG discussion videos, that's why there was a very early video of the first person view of a player running around Terra Prime. They haven't dumped anything, the Terra Nova system will be in the game and all that comes with it, they just changed the communities focus to the Stanton system because what's the point in giving away spoilers for a system they aren't bringing to the players yet?

We also know that they must have expanded the Squadron 42 story line from the 2012 Kickstarter as well because a 2013 stretch goal for 10 'extra star systems' included the Odin system as one of the 10. So why is the Odin system featured in the Squadron 42 vertical slice? Because the story was changed to a time before that Vega II attack to allow us to form an attachment to our character before the main event starts.

You might also notice that every time they show something from Squadron 42 they always show a date and time as well as the location of the events. There are no time jumps in Squadron 42, if you want to get to a star system you have to go through the intervening star system jumps. The route from Stanton to the Odin system goes through Pyro and Nyx. The only landing zone completed to a point where players could use it when they switched from using Terra Nova to the Stanton system was Delamar / Levski and that's why Delamar was put into the wrong star system. You can get to Odin via the same route from Terra through Magus to Stanton.

Star Citizen is not going to be some disconnected multiplayer sandbox tacked on to a single-player game, it is the continuation of the story, and your role in that story if you partook of Squadron 42, you will have an emotional connection to it - to the history, places and characters in it. That's why the level of detail and immersion has to be full on, because the plan is to keep hitting you in 'the feels' again and again throughout the story arc of this game universe. If the attack on Vega II is the equivalent of the Germans going into Poland in 1939 or France in 1940, that directly lead to that speech in the Houses of Parliament, then what's coming next? Admiral Bishop starts his speech by referring to the period of appeasement by the UEE doesn't he? It was Germany going into Poland that prompted the British Empire aligned nations to declare war, which is what Admiral Bishop is doing, so where is that battle of France equivalent going to take place that brings the enemy right up to the gates?

Simple and easy can be done quickly. Those that stick to the tired routine ways of faking it know that well. Bethesda have far more resources than CIG, and their project has been in development for a similar length of time with a barely updated Creation Engine, yet they have opted to stick to the usual cop out mechanics. No manual flying from space to ground, no walking around inside your ship while in flight. No EVA, no boarding, no ship to ship docking, no refuelling (they explained they "have made ships with unlimited fuel because they didn't want players to get frustrated", sounds a lot like one of those "you'd get bored" excuses doesn't it?). Starfield touts that they have 100 star systems - but they only have 4 built cities to visit in those 100 star systems. The cell technology to give the impression that you can land anywhere on a planetary body is just an extension of the cell technology in Skyrim V updated because the hardware is better. Of course what few know is that Bethesda could draw on years of modders doing free work on their engine to demonstrate how to extend it's capability.

You keep comparing this project to other games that don't even come close to the same level of complexity and capability this project has now, and you don't even know what the final version (or Squadron what 42 has) is going to be.

Chris Roberts decided (with the full backing of the community) that we would go for as little faking it as is possible. That's why there was no-one saying "You'd get bored of walking around in, and out of your ships interior after the 10th time."

As you say 90% of the work that the players can see comes at the end, and yet the player has more immersion and capability to just go and do as they please (when it works) now well before that end than most games made by the Fortune 500 Billion dollar companies. It's the most common statement made by new players when they come to the project.

It's not just 2 games either, it's a whole franchise, we know they are building these games with an eye to the future and they have already stated plans to have at least two follow up story campaigns after Episode One of Squadron 42 which will not require a whole remake of the game engine, tools and even in-game assets.

Corporate game companies make games for investors to make a profit - the player experience is secondary. This community and Chris Roberts always puts the player experience first before any other consideration where it is known to be possible. None of the games you mention made by either start up's or existing corporates released a Live multiplayer game to play while it is still being built.

If you want to be so pedantic then CIG did release a game on Dec 23rd 2015 (3 years and 2 months after the company was formed) with around 400 employees and $100 million total revenue, and they haven't charged a penny to existing players (more than they wanted to pay by choice) for all upgrades and addons since. Unlike the makers of No Mans Sky at least they were open and honest about the state of that game release and made people aware of the future plans for it. If you're going to keep giving all those other projects a pass on their 'faking it' lack of scope then you should judge Star Citizen by what it was capable of in Q1 of 2016 because at that time Star Citizen already had capabilities that ED, NMS, KSP2, Flight of the Nova and even Starfield won't have - probably ever.

Simple and easy can be done quickly. Those that stick to the tired routine ways of faking it know that well. Bethesda have far more resources than CIG, and their project has been in development for a similar length of time with a barely updated Creation Engine, yet they have opted to stick to the usual cop out mechanics. No manual flying from space to ground, no walking around inside your ship while in flight. No EVA, no boarding, no ship to ship docking, no refuelling (they explained they "have made ships with unlimited fuel because they didn't want players to get frustrated", sounds a lot like one of those "you'd get bored" excuses doesn't it?). Starfield touts that they have 100 star systems - but they only have 4 built cities to visit in those 100 star systems. The cell technology to give the impression that you can land anywhere on a planetary body is just an extension of the cell technology in Skyrim V updated because the hardware is better. Of course what few know is that Bethesda could draw on years of modders doing free work on their engine to demonstrate how to extend it's capability.

You keep comparing this project to other games that don't even come close to the same level of complexity and capability this project has now, and you don't even know what the final version (or Squadron what 42 has) is going to be.

Chris Roberts decided (with the full backing of the community) that we would go for as little faking it as is possible. That's why there was no-one saying "You'd get bored of walking around in, and out of your ships interior after the 10th time."

As you say 90% of the work that the players can see comes at the end, and yet the player has more immersion and capability to just go and do as they please (when it works) now well before that end than most games made by the Fortune 500 Billion dollar companies. It's the most common statement made by new players when they come to the project.

It's not just 2 games either, it's a whole franchise, we know they are building these games with an eye to the future and they have already stated plans to have at least two follow up story campaigns after Episode One of Squadron 42 which will not require a whole remake of the game engine, tools and even in-game assets.

Corporate game companies make games for investors to make a profit - the player experience is secondary. This community and Chris Roberts always puts the player experience first before any other consideration where it is known to be possible. None of the games you mention made by either start up's or existing corporates released a Live multiplayer game to play while it is still being built.

If you want to be so pedantic then CIG did release a game on Dec 23rd 2015 (3 years and 2 months after the company was formed) with around 400 employees and $100 million total revenue, and they haven't charged a penny to existing players (more than they wanted to pay by choice) for all upgrades and addons since. Unlike the makers of No Mans Sky at least they were open and honest about the state of that game release and made people aware of the future plans for it. If you're going to keep giving all those other projects a pass on their 'faking it' lack of scope then you should judge Star Citizen by what it was capable of in Q1 of 2016 because at that time Star Citizen already had capabilities that ED, NMS, KSP2, Flight of the Nova and even Starfield won't have - probably ever.

It is weird isn't it? Some can play fine, some even make video streams about it. When everyone is complaining predicting doom and gloom with no end in sight CIG go on to have a better influx of new players and funds than all previous years... best first quarter ever. In the beginning the ONLY thing we could build was a community of like-minded individuals all willing to work for a common goal.

It's almost as if those that are 'suffering' are in the minority. I played 3.18.2, everything went smoothly except there were no inventories in the shopping terminals. However it seems some did manage to buy and sell things. I managed to get out of the hangars with no issues but some say the ATC system isn't responding.

What do I do when there are issues making the game not worth my time - well, I close the game, hop over to the Issue Council, read some patch reports and either come to Spectrum or Reddit to see if others are having issues I can help with. I watch the output from CIG to see what is currently the focus of the teams or what are the future plans and know - they'll fix it eventually because they usually do.

There are so many variables - some have issues because of their system set up, well it's irritating but usually it can be fixed, or at least explained. Some have Issues because they expect the game to be in a playable state while it is being built - at all times - and can't cope with the idea that something unique and bigger than anything that has come before might need time to mature - it is being built before our very eyes. It's all part of a process that everyone can't necessarily appreciate on a scale few can even grasp fully. To me that is a good thing, it's exactly where I expect it to be.

The day they say it is done there are no more dreams of 'more to come', and that would be a sad ending in my view. Small and temporary inconveniences are deal breakers for some, for others the process is all part of the journey that makes the destination all more worthwhile. In truth, for me there is nothing in the game currently that makes it all worthwhile except to see that process lead to somewhere I can experience something so unique there is nothing else like it. Some say sarcastically "Well our children and grandchildren can enjoy the game even if we can't".. and yes, that is exactly the point, which other projects can you say that about?

Easy can be done tomorrow, easy is what the men in suits invest in for profit at the gamers expense. Easy is consumed and forgotten in a barely a few months. Easy doesn't need passion, communication and participation. Easy limits everyone's horizons. Monumental and ground breaking takes a community of like-minded people to grit their teeth and say, we'll just keep pushing until we get there. That's the amazing thing about being part of a community, when we get tired, impatient, feel dejected or even too frustrated and angry to carry on there is always someone ready to pick up the torch and carry on until we're ready again to get back into the fight. Every brick, screw and nail is another step toward that impossible dream that everyone kept saying would never happen.

If all someone needs is 'a game' there are plenty out there. We can never have that same deep emotional connection to any other game. This project has always been about pushing the boundaries, changing the paradigm - daring to dream bigger and do better in partnership with those that can make it happen, just for the joy of making it happen. One day you'll say with pride, I was a part of that impossible dream. I was there to help make it happen. We aren't just making a game (or two) we're changing the worlds perception about what is not possible and what is achievable if we have the collective will to do it. No-one ever said it was going to be easy. Be honest with yourself, is quick and easy what you really want from this experience?

Sadly as usual the points included do not even reference the large NPC population that will inhabit the Star Citizen game universe. There is also no mention of how detailed and all-encompassing the player reputation and history logs will be. You also neglected to inform the Chat GPT AI that there is a societal structure in the Star Citizen universe, where you go and what you can do will be dependent on your social status and security status - Citizenship, even if you have earned it or bought it, can be revoked by the UEE for lawless behaviour. There are prison sentences, and eventually there will be a prison planet, so expect longer punishments compared to now. Unlike now a criminal record, even though you have served your time, will persist.

Part of the reason the current game universe seems like a free-for-all wild west is because many of the systems are not yet in, and because of CIG's reluctance to be overly punitive, also there is no permanency to a players actions - if a player knows their record will be permanent, they are likely to be more cautious in their actions. They won't be able to access insurance / replacements as easily as lawful players. Player who have Squadron 42 and retire that Squadron 42 character to the verse will have more privileges like access to mil-spec equipment and material, and because of their higher security rating also certain locations and mission types will be restricted to only them. When you accept security missions from the Advocacy in the game now there is no restrictions even though the mission description refers to 'those with the relevant experience', this will be different in the future.

The game is about finite resources, managing those resources to progress toward the goal an individual has set for themselves. The NPC's will be a drain on the lawless player, whether they think they can identify between a player or NPC's or not is irrelevant. Secure systems will have security NPC's and they have infinite resources, which will respond to the level of crime reported in an area. Large herds of wildebeest still roam the African Savannah, and large herds of Carribou still roam northern Canada, Russia and Europe even though there are predators that hunt both those species - the percentage chance that any individual herding beast being attacked is very low. At range a player will not be able to distinguish between players and NPC ships and those same NPC's will use POI to POI route finding which a player can choose not to - the game space is huge, the chances of encounter outside of those trade routes are very very small. Which action seeking pirate is going to wait around for hours in the middle of nowhere on the off-chance of seeing a player?

There will be an up-to-the-minute security status warning system in place so that lawful players wishing to engage in their chosen activity can choose to go to a location or not based upon that information

The game will also have static security checkpoints to get around like the ones players just walk through because they are not functioning, there will be more, unlawful players will have to spend time and resources to get around those checkpoints - any time and resources spent dealing with NPC's and methods to circumvent security checkpoints is time and resources away from interfering with players.

Those players who simply like the PvP action can also play in support of security forces as bounty hunters, and while they can move about freely and can call on NPC resources the lawless player will not have those same benefits. They can chase lawless players around and the hunters become the hunted.

The game universe will have organised events - like Murray Cup Racing, IAE and ILW to name but a few. Lawless players will also be restricted in where they go - the Helios system for example has a paradise holiday planet, but Helios is also heavily secured as a UEE military outpost.

It is about striking a balance, and there will be 'game masters' monitoring everything going on in the game universe - if the balance is too far one way or the other they have many tools to redress that imbalance, they can close Jump Gates, increase security, restrict the flow of resources. They can even cause local natural disasters.

The economy will react to events in the game, if lack of security makes goods and services too expensive that will be dealt with. The UEEN will protect strategic resources as it feels it is required.There should never be a zero-risk scenario for any player whatever activity they choose to engage in, using your intelligence and wit to survive in such an environment is all part of the fun of life in the Star Citizen universe.

When all the systems are finally in place many who think they will have a high old time being the poacher will realise it is easier, more profitable and less restricting to become the gamekeeper - for every defection from the lawless camp that means double the security for the lawful player. Only the very dedicated will continue a lawless life. I very very rarely get attacked in the game now, and security right now is the worst it is ever going to be.

So, you think they should stop adding things now and just bugfix?

Animals will hunt other species to the edge of extinction given the opportunity however since predators are generally not omnivores if the 'food' population declines then so does the predator population - ergo balance is struck. There is a difference between full extinction and near extinction, also I did say 'just about' - I didn't say humans were the 'only species' that might hunt prey to extinction.

Uh huh.. interesting reasoning.

Well to be fair humans are just about the only species that will hunt other species to extinction, however to say 'humans are the only species that matter' is a bit misleading because in order to survive - have something to eat - then other species must survive and prosper.

There has to be a balanced eco-system. Is it the suggestion that 'Alpha Pirates' should farm traders, miners, salvagers etc in order to feed on them? I'd be interested to see the 'alpha's' describe how that farm system would work. Because the best analogy I could come up with that allows a continuous flow of victims would be vampirism. If piracy is too big of a problem then the 'alpha's' are left with nought but cannibalism - I doubt anyone would shed a tear about that.

Of course these pirates always completely forget about the NPC population.

If the victims also have brains, eyes, a fast set of legs, armour, teeth and claws it isn't always so one sided. Just because someone chooses a non-violent pastime doesn't mean they aren't perfectly capable of defending themselves when the need arises... so the term 'Alpha' is somewhat subjective. If you put a hungry Cheetah in a ring with a full grown bull elephant - my money's on the elephant.

This is an interesting bug / problem because it gives us clues about the process by which things are brought into the game universe.

Prior to any form of global persistence we had player persistence first - what you had equipped the last time you logged out should be on you when you log back in, logging out caused the DGS to record your last state to a database, so you are stowed. Then we had shipboard persistence, anything stowed aboard ship came back when you logged out/in again and brought your ship back to the pad. But if your ship was unstowed then you had to claim it via insurance and so lost it's contents because the server had no function to record it's state outside of a hangar, until bed logging.

A player is a collection of items to load into the game - first come 'the bones' that allow you to move and do stuff - they are invisible. Next, attached to those bones are a 3D model (mesh) of your body - one for your body and one for your head. That body and head are parented to your bones (the bones are the parent and the body meshes are attached to the bones). Next any gear you have is attached first, flight suit or clothes, the helmet chest armour and arm and leg armour are attached to the flight suit, the armour pieces have attachment points for other equipment. Your head has the HUD element attached to it. The helmet also has a HUD element attached to it.

The way it used to work is that a server was spun up with a pristine level designer made version of the Stanton system and every Stanton system on every server was identical. Once that was loaded onto a server other services would then load in other elements like NPC's from the NPC scheduler service and players (from some service I can't remember the name of so I'll just call it the player item attribution service). Player items include you (your avatar) and anything attributed to you on your RSI Hangar page. Anything not attached to you goes in the local parent inventory.

The Dedicated Game Server running the game would update your record of where you are and what you have in the game to a database if you stowed those player items before log out - which means making a hard copy record of where they were and what they were attached to. When the player loads into a landing zone you are attached to that entity which is the landing zone which is attached to the planet which is attached to the game universe entity. This is what is called Object Containers. As long as there is a record of you being present in an object container on a database the DGS can access then that data can be retrieved the next time you log in, if there is no record, then there is nothing to attach you to and you are 'unstowed'.

We are seeing lot's of evidence of network errors that are either not making entries to databases (like PES) or perhaps corrupted entries to databases. But the network issues also cause slowdown of retrieval of information that IS present on databases. We see this most commonly as control input to reaction time lag, inventory lag etc. So it's all part of the same problem.

They've switched from static databases that are updated from running DGS's to the constantly running persistence database which is currently being fed from multiple instances of the Stanton system at once - hundreds of them, perhaps even more. There is a temporary 'patch fix' service running on the DGS feeding data to and from the PES service. That patch fix seems to because issues with the network stack queue between the DGS, PES and the player clients, and other services. The change to the way we get our ships now is a fix to reduce the network traffic caused by players claiming ships at multiple locations, many at a time for those who have fleets of them.

The fix where you load into a non-game-universe standalone module to refresh the database holding your player items suggests if it works then it wasn't just network slowdown that threw up the 'player unstowed' problem... but the long load time to get into the game once you tried the fixes says there is network slowdown of retrieval of player attributed data as well, which would fit because we're seeing evidence of DGS to backend service network slowdown all over the place, and the only answer to network slowdown is the same as it used to be on dial up networking in the 1990's - all you can do is wait and hope.

The fully persistent universe they have planned includes the persistence database, but also the Replication Layer Gateway Service through which all input services feed information to running server shards and PES simultaneously. The persistence database is in but the Replication Layer isn't yet. When it does go in then each DGS will report to that persistently running service so that each server isn't making entries to the PES database individually. which should / will improve matters significantly.

sigh - please show me another game that has something similar to what Cloud imperium Games are calling The Replication Layer Gateway Service - Replication Layer for short.

If you read the information from CIG they put out about how they plan to implement full persistence and server meshing you'll see a graphic, it is a map of how the services connect to each other. You'll see that game clients will connect to the Replication Layer, the Replication Layer then connects to the DGS shards and the persistence database - there is no direct connection between player clients and DGS shards. The Replication Layer Gateway Service has a function to synchronise the 'state' of the DGS's and the Persistence database and then replicate that state to each individual connected game client.

The Replication Layer Gateway Service is not yet implemented - but PES is - parts of it's function are still running on each individual DGS shard which means multiple DGS's are trying to synchronise with the persistence database - and they are getting out of sync. The persistence database started running when 3.18.0 went live and continued running until they reset it with 3.18.1. No DGS shards run continuously - none of them. That global synchronisation function will be broken off the DGS build and taken over by the Replication Layer Gateway Service which will also run continuously.

Read the output from the dev's regarding the issues with 3.18.0 - they don't talk about server performance or tick rates, they do talk about databases, services and network, and they actually use the term 'out of sync'.

The problem is more that there is a service missing, a function that is currently running on the individual DGS's - The Replication Layer Gateway Service. Once that goes in it's job is to keep everything in sync rather than multiple DGS's trying to keep everything in sync. That function will be taken off the DGS build.

Relating Star Citizen to the way other multiplayer games work is of no use, Star Citizen doesn't work like other multiplayer games. I'm well aware that the way networked multiplayer games work is written in stone, but CIG threw those stones away and re-wrote the book.

The answer is yes and no. They can do things which improve the backend service network performance - and they have - but yes Server Meshing will alleviate that network strain even more because servers that only hold a small part of the game world don't need to update all the change states of entities in that game world, only the one's that are in that local area of the game world.

The reason this problem showed up was because currently all shards hold multiple versions of the Stanton system, when server meshing goes in there won't be so man multiple versions of the game world running simultaneously.

It does, but those effects are in the few milliseconds, not many seconds or even minutes.

An example:
Players were reporting that they requested ATC and the hangar doors appeared to open, so the player flies in because the DGS told them the ATC command was granted and the doors are open - but when the DGS queries the persistence database it says the hangar doors were not open the ship hit the doors and was destroyed - so the player may even have reached the landing pad before the PES updated DGS says - your ship hit the doors and exploded. That's how badly out of sync the DGS's were getting with the backend services.

If that were due to DGS tick rate then that server tick rate would have to have been at multiple thousands of milliseconds per tick.

I have been telling people for a while now what causes interaction delay and 'change state' delay, and no it doesn't have anything (much) to do with server tick rate. It's because of delay in network traffic between the player client and server, server and backend services (like the PES set of services), then network back out to connected player clients.

There are only a small number of movement controls that are directly controlled by the player (input commands), most player inputs which are 'change state requests' go up to the server first, get collected, sorted and sent to the backend services then the results of those 'change states' are sent out to each connected client by the server simultaneously so hopefully all players see those change state events at the same time. Change state events are terminals, doors open/close, hangar doors, ATC requests, weapon customisation, player gear changes equip/unequip, elevators and loot boxes etc.

People say 'this thing is not working!' like calling ATC, or getting out of your chair, or getting out of bed, , turning ships lights on, or even the delay in an NPC realising the player is there or missions not completing - they may or may not be bugged but those of us who wait before spamming more commands (because we know why it'a happening) will find that the command does work there is just a variable wait delay before you see the result of your input - this is caused by network delays, not server tick rates. These network delays have been mentioned in dev posts and patch notes.

If you've had a 30K you'll know the game becomes unresponsive to most commands because those commands made by player input don't happen client side first, if they did happen client side first we'd all see the results of player actions at different times and as they said the persistence database 'got out of sync' with player activity and that is why it needs resetting, with a 30K they need the network connection to the server which is missing when there is a server crash. They have made a DGS Crash recovery service which uses the persistence database to spin up servers to replace the one that crashed in it's virtually identical state, when they talked about this they said the player may experience periods of game unresponsiveness for a short while until the recovered server shard is spun up and connected to all backend services.

The reason they changed the way ship ordering is done at ASOP terminals when you first log into the game is because players were spawning in for the first time and flying to a space station then requesting all their ships to be transferred to the space station all at once by going down the list (I was guilty of this and I have over 30 ships) - this caused the 'entitlement processing' backend servers to get overloaded with network traffic - which lead to ASOP terminal issues and inventory issues, even player log in flow issues.

Anyone who has been following Elon Musk could work out, every project he has been involved with is about that colony on Mars. Can't have ICE powered cars on Mars. The hyperloop is fairly pointless and impractical on Earth, but it would be perfect for Mars. Need better, cheaper solar panels and batteries on Mars. Need a tunnel boring machine on Mars for habitats and underground highways as well as mineral mining, even the robot is about Mars. Starlink is a double-plus, they can use it on Mars too but it also has the advantage on Earth that no government or pesky human can interfere with the information flow - cables are vulnerable, constellations of satellites aren't as easily taken out, and we know how he feels about governments and their oversight. He isn't the biggest fan of 'democracy in action'. Notice he isn't interested in anything that flies in atmosphere except rocket powered engines.

Once they reach the asteroid belt there's gold aplenty in them thar hills. Way more than there is down on this ball of rock and it isn't locked up with private land owners or governments. Once they get there it's easier to extract, it's getting there and staying long enough to start operations that is the issue. Once they do though they don't need anything from Earth anymore except warm bodies for a while. Plenty of rare Earth minerals out there and no restrictions on nuclear power with unlimited cloudless sunlight.

He mooted the idea of taking fissile radioactive material to Mars, all the internet nerds laughed at the idea because they assumed he thought about spreading it over the surface. But it's more likely he'd tunnel under the polar ice cap and dump it down the very deep hole. It would heat the surrounding rock if there was enough of it, the outcome would be to melt the polar ice - which is mainly CO2 and water - thickening the atmosphere, but if the sub-surface rock did melt the heavy radio-active material would sink down further into the core - again big 'if' there was enough to make the core rotate again then Mars has a magnetosphere perhaps enough to stop atmospheric loss into space (a thicker atmosphere would reduce cosmic radiation too) and reduce solar radiation at the surface. There would have to be a lot of it, but there's plenty out there in the asteroid belt and there may even be some on Mars' surface anyway. It would be many many years, perhaps even hundreds before that plan could work...

I wonder why he's so keen to look into life extending and human capability extending technologies? Of course once you leave Earth there are no laws against stem cell research and cloning for organ harvesting to worry about. All those trillionaires suddenly so mad keen to get into space right now. I recommend people to watch the movie 'Elysium' with Matt Damon and Jodie Foster, very interesting premise.

Interesting guy, one might even say 'He's driven'.

Already coming. It's called The Spectrum and people will see it first in Squadron 42. It's the Star Citizen version of the internet with sports news and shows, entertainment shows and regular news / current events shows like 'Plain Truth' and 'Empire Report'. We've already seen some of the videos for The Spectrum: Galactic Gear, Whitley's Guide, Reunion, the Squadron 42 recruitment video for the first Invictus Launch Week etc.

The Reliant MAKO News Van has cameras and an editing suite so that players can stream in-game events to The Spectrum, and we can see camera drones used in many videos and images they have put out. The first time we saw camera drones was in the Admiral Bishop speech to the UEE Senate video.

What the OP is asking for will come from the TDD (in the game now but not functional), The Spectrum and from interacting with the NPC population. There is also the ARK Repository database in the Tayac system where players can trade information. In the early days of the project they stated repeatedly, the most valuable commodity in Star Citizen will be information.

Of course we all know you exited your ship leaving the thrusters on making it neutrally buoyant (as it's designed to be) on a planet with storm force winds. You can see the thrusters working in the picture.

Wassup? Not used to having that level of immersion in your games?

Turn your engines off before you exit your seat, just like you would any IRL vehicle - simple.

Ah well I suppose it's back to the ED forums Star Citizen thread for you then... byeeee!

We do know the tactics: Major new milestone patch. Upcoming event. Upcoming sale. Let's get in there and piss in the well for any newcomers. When's the hack gaming-rag article coming out? Ask Stuart.. he'll know.

You understand that anything you put into those AI bots is not private. Why would CIG put their proprietary code into something owned by someone else which allows access to anyone?

Are you aware that CIG went to court to stop another company getting access to their game code?

Some of the things people think are bugs are not actually code bugs, they are the system hardware struggling to keep up. Very often when things don't seem to respond in the game or random events happen unexpectedly that is an issue with the network because Star Citizen doesn't work like a standard multiplayer and if people understood that they'd realise a significant amount of those "it doesn't work" events resolve themselves if you just wait until the network catches up.

A lot of the bugs people report are also the result of the deficiency in the players hardware and lack of optimisation of their own PC or internet connection.

Would you like to hear what the people who are making the game code say about 'bugs'?

So why are you here if you found something else to occupy you? This the forum to discuss the game after all.

Some of us are having a perfectly pleasant time in 3.18.1... thank you.

Jump Points, Jump Point Mapping - Requires Server Meshing unless you just want to explore only Stanton. You see, unlike other games there won't be a faked loading screen to move system to system.

Farming - Requires full Persistence and an active NPC population that can leave landing zones and small POI's. There are harvestable plants in the game already. Of course roads to and from the farm would be useful too. If you have a boat you could use the rivers - we've got rivers!

Data Running and Reporting - Requires Server Meshing since data running is system to system.

AI Crews - Requires Full Persistence. What are your AI crew going to do while you're logged out? You want them faked? They'll sit in their crew seats and spawn with the ship? We do have NPC's flying ships and even NPC aboard NPC ships that can disembark combat ready to a POI. Unfortunately they aren't members of the magic circle club so they have to open the back ramp and run out.

Aliens - Squadron 42 gets priority.

Science? - Of what exactly? Isn't that just a function of exploration / scanning? We've already got basic scanning for minerals and ships. The Building Blocks UI is required first, being worked on.

Base building - Requires Full Persistence

Shopkeeping: Trading Ships and Trading Businesses - Requires Full Persistence. We have commodity trading from ships already. We can sell to, and buy from shops already.

Ship components - coming soon™ - Required a way to remove and replace them manually ie tractor beam functionality which is on the Roadmap as committed for 3.19. You can buy ship components and have them automagically installed - a lot like in ED!

Gas harvesting + Refueling (ingame?) We have the gas giant planet! Still work to be done on planet biomes and atmosphere's, ships with scoops just need an update. Station to ship and ship to ship refuelling is already in the game.

Passenger transport - You can transport whoever you like, and we have planetside shuttles. if you mean NPC AI controlled transport that requires full persistence and an active NPC population

Touring? Basically the same as exploration - you can tour the Stanton system no problem.

Fauna and Giant Sand Worms - The giant sand worm was never a promise and by including this you show where you got your list from, it was an homage to Dune rather than watching a single guy fight off multiple enemies to end the sequence, that's all. They've just told us they are working on fauna and we have actually got cave creatures. If someone had asked about the Oni on Hurston at least you'd know they'd been paying attention. Going back to the ED forums now? Ask them where the ship interiors are. Easy to keep promises when you make hardly any isn't it?


land ownership - they have sold land beacons. Some do own land already. You can't claim land for free in UEE controlled systems therefore needs both full Persistence and Server Meshing.

Owning and managing factories, bars and other stuff like that - needs full persistence

Job boards or equivalent - Needs full persistence then Quantum and Quasar

Exploration roles - just repeating yourself here.. you probably meant to say multi-crew roles. Already partially in with more coming. Oh.. and of course something no other space game has is in already - Speelunking.

Refining - already in the game. Again showing where you got this list since that uninformed and exaggerated yak-fest hasn't been updated in years or screened for duplicate entries.

Insurance + Character Immortality and Inheritence - The banking and insurance system, rather than basic ship insurance requires full Persistence. Immortality? Never read Death of a Spaceman? Inheritance requires full persistence for personal history logs. Here we are again showing what a low effort copy and paste achieves.

Stealing or Stolen goods gameplay - already in. As well as contraband smuggling.

Player housing and Personal Hangers - building interiors being worked on now expected in patch 3.19, requires full persistence.

Pets (promised?) - yes they were, actually a stretch goal and in this weeks monthly report they said they are making a dog, 'boids' are also in progress. We've seen work on an alien bear with claws and a 'space cow'.

Fishing - never promised, it was said you would be able to trade in exotic fish for your fish tanks, there was a fish selling shop on Delamar before they moved it back to Nyx.

Hunting - never promised but since they are going to have alien creatures and animals it's expected

Lumberjacks - never promised,

working pool tables - always considered a long term end-game goal, you can play chess in the game. If you grab yourself a pico-ball you can shoot hoops on the 890J. Pico can also hit the powder on his snowboard. If you find a metal salvage sheet to use as a snowboard you can do it too.

basketball courts (not promised, wishful thinking) - no but they did make a basketball court on the Javelin. So probably in Squadron 42.

Full Persistence - the first stage of which is to get the back end systems in place (put in with 3.18.0) still being bug fixed and tested in the Live game.

You never even mentioned SataBall, it is on that list you've copied and didn't bother to check through. Much less effort put into finding out what's actually happening with the game's development.

So, given that the current servers are full to busting right now until Server Meshing - which of the things on this list should they prioritise do you think?

The Banu Merchantman is a long range flying mobile bazaar with 2 big guns and a Banu Defender in the top bay.

You could also get a Kraken Privateer which has shops on board.

Shopping is already in the game. What else do you need to know?

The flashy white effects and flat texture for the planet - loading screen.

Notice the HUD - green writing - EDL Assist autoland function. Listen to the audio.

I know you didn't bother watching the other videos I linked from 2016... but this is short enough even for you.

Player communication as immersive as they could get was always something Chris was interested in, in the early days he said he didn't want players to have to use outside platforms to communicate.. again since the time and the money were available, and he found (or more likely they found his project) a company (Faceware) that could deliver it virtually complete - why not? Yes it could have been a post launch feature but if Faceware had it to a condition it was useable, then why wait? They did a promotion video for VoiceAttack and I'm confident the idea of integrating that functionality in the game may have been mooted - perhaps it will become a feature in the future but right now (and especially back in 2016) with the changeability in keybinds it wouldn't be feasible.

Let's not forget Faceware were also developing high end gaming hardware to go with that FOIP feature, if it was the case that they came to Chris with a knock-down bargain basement price for the application so they could get it into a game they thought would do well, then why not? It is a feature that has been a draw for some in the community particularly those who make Youtube videos and machinima (something Chris really likes) using FOIP then the 'added value' draw to the overall funding is unquantifiable, but certainly not negative, maybe it paid for itself?

ToW of war is another of those 'expand the franchise' they tendered out to another company, did they start it with that intention? It's notable that Firesprite were mainly doing work for Sony Entertainment Division when they enrolled them, they also worked on the Arena Commander modules.

My personal feeling is part of that intent was an eye to future funding if they could sell modules of the game on other platforms - but I can't argue one way or the other, none of us know enough details about it to be certain. Again.. the time and the money were there while core tech pillars were being developed. If they knew it wouldn't detract from the project overall because they were going to use existing assets, then perhaps the logic stands up. They only ever had 5 staff working on it. It could have been another 'procedural planets' situation, as long as they were keeping up with their scheduled work then a side project with future revenue potential seems like a good idea.

Whether anyone agrees with it or not, personally I think having a longer term plan is a good thing. Many strings to the bow make sweet music. Did it work out as they expected or hoped? It would seem not, of course we don't know for certain, but the whole project is a 'try'. I am expecting them to release modules on other platforms to raise the games awareness and monetisation prospects for it's long term future, even if they stick to PC only they can still sell stand-alone modules. I think it would be a very good idea to do that, of course they aren't going to talk about such things in detail because it involves third parties.

When I say 'everything else that came about' I'm referring to the posts that talk about those 'follow on features' as though they are simply tacked on scope creep for the sake of it, when they aren't.

They're having another boring time over at the ED forums. No new horizons to gaze upon, no amazing odyssey to undertake, they have to come and share their excitement at an opportunity to show their keyboard-worrier prowess. New patch drop, Freefly and of course it's the weekend. I note the 'nothing new in the game' argument seems to have lost it's flavour this year.

You make a lot of assumptions and the picture is disingenuous. I see lots of players in the game with armour, in fact much more wearing it than not wearing it.

I'm not 'young' I'm 61 years old and I've been with the project since 31st March 2014. Yes, it's still in Alpha. That Alpha started on Dec 23rd 2015 - so it's not "10 years in Alpha".

I wear armour in the game and weapons, it's very very easy to pick up armour and weapons for free but I also wear my sub-flair and concierge armour... and weapons.

It's a Freefly, a new patch and the weekend - what a surprise to see the usual suspects coming back with the constant negativity. Colour me shocked! Predictable and boring.

Through what most would argue is the least 'attractive month ever' in terms of development this 'niche' project has increased by over 1000 new accounts PER DAY in the month of March - no events, no referral bonuses, no sales, even knowing that wipes would be coming very soon and there are game stopping bugs. Elite Dangerous Odyssey is down to less than 5000 daily average players and has been for the last year, and at it's peak it never went above 27,600. Of course cessation of support and update for consoles won't help either.

Despite the 3.18.0 less than stellar roll out and no events or new ships they have had the best March for funding ever this year, yet again, and the first quarter total was more than last which was their highest grossing year.

Heh heh.. just telling it like it was.

Here's something to ponder on.

Those people who now come into the forums accusing some of us of being White Knights for Chris Roberts were back in 2014 somewhat haughtily telling people in the community that Chris was right, there won't be flight to ground and free roam around planets and the rest of the community simply didn't understand how games were made. They were absolutely right of course - until the thing with CryTek happened. Some of them couldn't adjust, they felt betrayed. That's where the 'scope creep' meme came from because they knew what a massive undertaking it would be to get it to work in what they 'knew' the game was going to be.

Ironic eh?

People use this term 'scope creep' as though it is some in-arguable fact. It isn't, it was a meme dreamt up by those who were disgruntled that they were in the minority when a single key change happened, unfortunately they were some of the main players in the community at the time. If you go back to the days of 10 for the Chairman you'll hear their game handles being mentioned a lot. They were used to expecting to speak to the development team directly, they even used to email them very regularly. Like daily in some cases. Through their barrage of CS tickets they deliberately steered the marketing team to allow exploits of the RSI store functions - the buy to melt mechanic for example, which have had to be patch fixed to regular players inconvenience ever since. These guys weren't stupid. They were smart cookies who could think ahead. In those days the marketing division were saying yes to just about anything they asked for. So there's the irony, the scope creep in marketing and it's complexity was directly caused by those very same people now accusing CIG of scope creep.

So what happened?

Up to late 2014 Cloud Imperium Games - Chris Roberts in particular had said that there wouldn't be any free flight down to planets (because he knew CryEngine didn't have that capability at that time). There was going to be an auto-land (in reality a loading screen just like in the Flight of The Nova and what is coming to Starfield) function to go down to spaceports on planets and each landing zone was going to be a hand made fixed size play space. Like other games made with CryEngine, the 'invisible walls' or encircling high un-clime-able mountains to stop you going off the edge of the map. Erin and Chris were talking about security domes (like in Arena Commander) to stop players trying to fly out of landing zones. The community generally didn't like this, they didn't like it at all.


CryTek were having cashflow issues and the dev team had not been paid for months. Sean Tracy originally worked as 'Roving Ambassador' for the CryTek R&D team so he was seconded to Cloud Imperium Games but he resigned from CryTek and came to work for CIG. Members of the CryTek R&D team all resigned and Brian Chambers decided to set up their own development studio in Frankfurt, he contacted Chris and asked about the possibility of them being offered work on Star Citizen - obviously we know what happened there. Chris was very keen to get such experienced CryEngine people, it was a golden opportunity not to be missed, anyone who would have found out about it later if it hadn't happened would now be berating Chris for not taking that opportunity when he had the chance.

One of the R&D dev team 'Hannes' had been following the discussion about players wanting to be able to fly down to planets and free roam about those planets and moons (in early 2016 I was at BritizenCon where Brian talked to us about what happened), the community hadn't been happy with a video CIG had shown that showed the Auto-land down to Area 18 so in his own time he set about seeing if he could do what the community was begging for, he made it then he presented it to Chris.

So, there they were, Chris had his Squadron 42 project in the bag now as far as he was concerned the multiplayer was the 'fans and backers' game, the original plan was for the multiplayer to be a 'drop in drop out' function of Squadron 42. When he made his Kickstarter pitch he could not have known what was going to happen at CryTek, indeed the speed and amount of funding the community was giving him took him completely by surprise. He knew he now had the opportunity to give the community what it was virtually demanding, imagine if he hadn't? The backlash from the community would be huge. Also the PU as it existed at first launch would not have happened, it would have taken longer to get a few landing zones hand made so that the players could get into the verse, he originally only planned the modules for players to sample before the game release. Were his original plans 'optimistic'? Very probably, which game developer has not overshot their planed release date?

Everything else that keeps getting referred to as 'scope creep' by the noisy few and then picked up by everyone else only came about for two reasons, to solve the extra functionality that full planets would need, such as Object Container Streaming, and to update the game engine to the more modern standards, for example PBR - Physically Based Rendering - came to CryEngine around the end of 2014. Again if Chris has said 'no' to updating to PBR people would have howled in derision. Things like 64 bit precision, server meshing, a massive NPC population and full persistence were already part of the original plan, generally people just didn't know it. Watch the original launch trailer for Squadron 42, notice anything? Ships inside ships, which means physics grids inside a physics grid - you're not seeing a cut-scene of you being shot out of a launch tube to materialise in your cockpit, because that ships in ships feature was the original plan.

The 2016 version of Star Citizen as planned would have looked like an outdated version of Starfield... and those who think he should have stuck to his plan for that type of game and then built on it with expansions simply don't understand how those core tech features were fundamental to the final game once that decision was to put in full planets. They could not have gone back and re-built the game to get all todays features in, let alone all the ones that are coming.

Those who demand work on Squadron 42 be shelved (and a lot of them are those FUD-Spreaders) don't know what they are talking about, it was the community's version of the BDSSE and the requirement to have a playable Live iterative game release that has slowed everything down. Normally in game development the pretty graphics is the last thing they ad, all the money spent on Style Guides, lore, texturing, missions and even the expanded ship fleet and their functionality beyond Squadron 42 requirements was so that the community could have something to play while waiting. Every time there has been an opportunity to pull in more people to build the PU Chris has taken it with both hands, the Montreal office for example staffed by ex-Bethesda, ex-Ubisoft and even TV and movie industry developers are all working hard to put in features for the PU not required for Squadron 42.

Chris is very conscious that he was given the opportunity to build 'his' dream game far better than he was ever expecting by the community and so he felt an obligation to listen to the community's dreams. If we could supply the where-with-all (as we have) then he would commit to the many more years of his life to make it happen for 'our' game, not just 'his'. Those who like to compare to other games forget, how would we all respond if Chris was telling us "You'd get bored walking around inside your ship after the 10th time", how did ED fans respond to it? They all knew it was a BS cop-out. Unlike some in this community Chris sees this whole project as a partnership between the development team and the community, as clearly expressed by Brian Chambers. The Pupil To Planet video was their answer to the community regarding the fact that they heard us and what our version of the BDSSE should be.

I doubt there is a single member of the development who aren't also community members, every time we speak to them in person they are always talking about how they are making the community's game - not Chris Roberts game.

It will take years and years to do what the community was demanding (because they aren't knowledgeable about what it takes to do what they are asking) and so the Alpha iterative approach was the only one that could have worked. Taking the Alpha approach 'brick by brick' to give the community something to play while waiting is what has complicated and lengthened the development time significantly. since Chris knew this was going to be the case there was no reason not to have other features worked on because they don't delay the game at all, they're just things that add to the experience which they could do anyway because now they had more time.

Anyone who says things happened differently are lying FUD-spreaders with an axe to grind because they weren't the darlings of the dev team and top dogs in the community anymore, or they are the victims of those 'influencers' who think they 'made the project' in the early days simply regurgitating the crap they've been spreading.

It is mentioned as a bug in the patch notes: Actor Feature / Network category - player inputs may take many seconds to activate.

The way Star Citizen works is that you command your character to get up by holding Y, but the command is not executed locally on your PC game client that command goes to the server then back down to your character (there are good reasons for this). If there is network lag - which 3.18 has been plagued with - then your character appears to do nothing so people assume it isn't working and try pressing buttons again. Of course this all adds to the queue for network bandwidth.

When the game loads to your spawn bed, wait a while to let everything load in. Hold Y once - don't do anything else and just wait. Eventually your character will respond to the command. It's the same with turning engines off in your ship, opening doors etc. Almost all player commands work this way.

The long load times., the voids at stations and missing elevators is a PC game client load issue. Star Citizen requires a lot of RAM, more than 20GB at times. Even at minimum Windows takes more than 6GB RAM. If you have many memory resident background process running it is substantially more than 6GB. If you only have 16GB RAM this leaves the game less than 10GB free RAM. If you have a GPU with less than 8GB VRAM then any deficit of VRAM is transferred to RAM (which is slower to load than VRAM).

The first time the game runs on your system it takes time to compile shaders to the Shader Cache, this should be lessened on subsequent running of the game. If you interrupt the shader compile it will just start it all over again next time you run the game.

The partial fix for this lack of RAM is:
1. Make sure as few memory resident programs are running in the background as possible. Use the Task Manager.

2. Increase your Windows System Pagefile up to 32GB and place that pagefile on your fastest access storage drive. you should do this even if you have 32GB RAM installed, it will make your whole system run generally smoother.

Use the fastest access drive for the game files, it must be at least an SSD, preferably NVMe.

Also if you have NVidia Control Panel you can increase the Shader Cache Size in Settings - Manage 3D Settings - Global Settings to 10GB. If you are short of space on that drive and it is your OS drive then you can free up more space by reducing the Recycle Bin max size from it's default 10% for al drives to something like 10GB. You can also Google 'How to delete Hiberfil.sys' follow the simple instructions, restart your PC and that will free up as much disk space as you have installed RAM.

3. In the game go away from the area where there is missing geometry if you can, and return again after a minute or two, which will give that local geometry time to load into your system RAM. Unfortunately trains are hard on RAM loading because they go so fast lot's of geometry is being streamed into and out RAM very quickly. The name for this in-game system of loading game geometry into RAM is called Object Container Streaming - OCS. The Dedicated Game Servers that the game runs on also has a form of this (Server) Object Container Streaming - SOCS. There are two other types of managers in the game that control what is loaded into RAM, one is called Bind Culling and one is called 'Off Screen Culling' by walking away from an area, so that you can no longer see it, with missing geometry you are using 'Off Screen Culling' to unload that area from memory and re-loading it when you return.

I also think that landing zone markers should be at the spaceport, not the actual landing zone structures.

Hopefully the new Star Mao will have all those features.

Lot's of people are playing the game. I have played it and I'm not a streamer.

I'll give an example of the way I approach trying to figure out how CIG organises their systems.

We know they switched from the sequential read iCache to a graphed based database to suit the Object Container system better because they told us.

When people were first reporting 19K's, 30K's etc trying to log into the game some said they noticed that accounts with many items were getting those connection issues more often. My first reaction was to poo poo the idea, and I did reply to a post about it in that vein because my supposition of how the DGS's were accessing player account held items (including the player body) was that it had direct access to that attributed account item database per player on request.

CIG have never talked about how the account bound items are brought into the game as far as I'm aware so I'm in the dark.

When I thought about the player invisibility problem and the idea crept in that maybe the player body is loaded into the persistent item cache with the parent being the landing zone, which has parent planet, which has parent game universe, it made me re-evaluate the claim of those who said the log in issues were noticeably more frequent for players with lots of items because they would be most susceptible to time-outs.

If the process was that each item was requested by the DGS from the player attribution account cache 'on demand' by the player that log in delay idea simply wouldn't make sense.

Then a thought occurred to me.

You can only access account bound items in the local inventory of where you choose to spawn first and nowhere else, it could be CIG's choice or it could be a limitation of the system. If it's not CIG's choice this shouldn't be a limitation if the 'on demand' theory was correct. If the DGS was requesting from the player account database on demand you should be able to access that stuff anywhere in the game, but you can't.

Next the empty ASOP terminal bug shows up, no-one can access their attributed ships. Those ships are account bound, they come from the player attribution database, not the global item persistence database. Hmmm. OK.

So they are putting in the PES system right now and all these issues are showing up.

Another thought occurred to me:
What if on load into the game the player body is attached to the landing zone and all the players account bound items are also all loaded into the persistence database with the parent being the player's inventory attached to the landing zone? What an odd notion that the players face and body textures and hair might be items to attach to a parent body (basically only a game camera item)?

Now it makes sense - to me at least.
You can only access your gear from within the parent item - your spawn location's local inventory which is attached to the player body (which is really the players inventory when the player is attached to that location).

What if the code written to the persistence database for an item allowed an 'attach' function to a parent and a sub item attach function so it could be a parent itself? If the attach item code was fine and dandy, and the sub item attach code was corrupted you could get into the game but you wouldn't be able to attach anything to you. If the attach to parent code was busted you wouldn't be able to successfully log into the game because there'd be no confirmation of your arrival. To the system you are just another item it couldn't find so any network timeout on the loading in of your body would result in a failure to get into the game.

If corrupted data was being written into the persistence cache about your body maybe it would affect whether your body could be classed as a parent item? If it were so what would you see? Nothing attached to the player, not even the default gear.. or maybe even hair and textures?

If the persistence cache was not getting the ship items loaded into the local inventory of the player parent from the player attribution account database then there would be no ships on the local ASOP terminal because those ships were supposed to attach to the parent item 'player body'.

Ergo with this reasoning player invisibility and no ships are basically the same problem.

So my spit-balling supposition is, the DGS does not access player account attributed items 'on demand' they are all loaded into the persistence database at log in ready to be available to the player and the landing zone parent if the player discards them from their body or inventory. That's a lot of data if lots of players are logging in at once. This makes sense to me given the bugs that are showing up with the first implementation of PES. The fact that they have gradually got worse over time (or as player load has increased) suggests the constantly running pCache has gotten corrupted with a combination of bad writes and network issues. Hence the bug hunting and resets.

I don't have the skillset to know why network issues might cause bad writes to a static database, so my reasoning on the matter stalls there.

Yes, you're right the Replication Layer Gateway is made from several services as you say, I just lumped them in together as CIG do for brevity's sake. (I was making a little in-joke when I said the RL was a traffic cop, not a scribe. 
 
 ).

I do write these posts off the top of my head, so I admit I might not be as clear in the details as it's possible to be. I also suffer from word blindness so sometimes when writing posts I forget the name of something and have to go find it or sit and wait for it to pop into my head after a while, I'm terrible with names, but understanding systems I am good at, but the overall idea comes across.

I mentioned in other posts above how CIG only talk about components if they are new and relevant, once they have a whole service they just mention the service, of course it depends who is doing the talking. What is now accepted as PES should actually have the acronym PESS because it's the Persistent Entity Streaming Service made of several components.

My aim in writing posts isn't absolute accuracy for those who already know as much, if not more than I, it's to try and describe the overall systems to those who find them hard to follow and don't understand why things are happening in the game. Some may think it but I'm not trying to points score, only further the discussion - if I am trying to be funny, or scathing, the style is completely different. Posts like yours for example if it wasn't directed at me i'd just read it and appreciate the information. I'm conscious there are other read only' people and so if I think a point needs clarifying I jump and do my best. It's a discussion and though i write my posts as if I'm stating fact that's only for brevity, if I'm wrong I'm happy for someone to come along and re-clarify - it is a discussion in a character limited forum post style that doesn't lend it's self to complex discussion, or presentation.

I don't know anything about CIG's account log-in flow for example, so i don't talk about that. I have no idea why people are getting 40K's.

A lot of it is gleaned from reading what the dev's say, and first read is always a brain ache - but then you start asking 'Why' what are they trying to achieve, what problem are they trying to solve and how did they say they solved a problem (especially when you see things in the game) then go read it (watch it) again, and again and the more you ask why is something happening in the game the more the read of the information makes sense. For example if players on a server are reporting NPC ships teleporting around why is it that when an elevator door opens (even though I'm on a US server rather than my home UK server) do players see elevator doors open at the same time as me? It strongly suggests there has to be some prioritisation going on, it can't just be server tick rate because that would affect everything. The elevator might be late, but the other players see it open when I do. If, as they have said, network overload is a problem at scale, then why not have the issue of players seeing certain things happen at different times, when there's obvious issue of lack of simultaneity with other things?

I have no firm idea why some players or ships are invisible, but if the parts that make up the players appearance, wearable items and face, are indeed stored on a cache and it's not being accessed properly, that would make sense. considering items are attached to item ports and those items are supposed to be persistent in the game, it leads to the conclusion it's the same item cache access problems as all the other issues. They're basically just the game camera now without items attached to them. They can't use anything because in order to use it it has to be flagged as unstowed and attached to a parent item, that's a problem if the DGS is querying the database and it's being told that parent item doesn't exist. the players are reporting that when invisible they can open their inventory and see items, because that parent item - the inventory - does exist on the database but they can't equip anything from that inventory. In my estimation this strongly suggests the player body is loaded as an in-game item on the persistence database normally but it has failed. The player attribution database is making corrupt entries to the pCahe about the players body, but not about other items they own.

Again I have no firm idea what they are talking about when they say 'Optimisations' but if that means re-prioritising some things in the network queueing stack because in the past it wasn't a big issue when they had less network bandwidth concerns, that again would make sense. In the PTU these issues didn't arise, there's no difference between server player populations and tick rate between Live and PTU from the DGS running and player point of view, but there's a very big difference between the network requirement of many many DGS's running needing bandwidth into that thing that determines the state of everything in the game.

I can't remember when exactly they changed the way commands were executed - years ago - but there was a lot of complaint about lag in the game at the time prior to it's implementation. Clive Johnson was the one who did a write up about the changes they made. There's a very easy way to check the voracity if my statement, log in, run around a bit, pull your network cable to simulate a 30K and you'll see what you can't do. If the results of your commands were only client side first there's no logical reason you can't do those things. I have checked some of the things you can't do while waiting for the 30K timeout notification. Example when there's a server client disconnect you can equip to your hand a medpen, but you can't use it. For a time players did report on the IC they could do they same, they could equip a medpen but they couldn't use it. It's the same with the utility tool, you can equip it but you can't use it during a server client disconnect. If you're noticing there is significant delay operating some game items like doors, and yet you get almost instant response to using a medpen when you know it only works while the client is connected to the server the logical conclusion is that there must be some prioritisation going on.

Possible, but network traffic is prioritised and the fact that they said they applied the IFCS (probably just the tag rather than the whole sheebang) to the missile to fix the issue suggests it isn't just a problem of server tick rate. How would applying IFCS to a missile affect tick rates? There's a lot more stuff needing network bandwidth in Star Citizen than your average game.

Another reason to suggest that some commands are not executed on the client side first. As you say the perceived state by the players - but that's all players and the aim is to try to achieve maximum simultaneity even for clients that are separated by great geographical distance.

Reading my post again I made it sound like all player commands, but it's likely that actions performed that only affect the player directly may execute client side first since it affects orientation and speed (not exactly sure, you can walk around when a server has crashed for example, but you can't open a door or call an elevator, you can't customise a weapon).

Just watching how the game performs you can see that 'change state' commands for doors, elevators, even player item holders, inventories etc that potentially affect all players (because they should see them) not just the one making the command. It wouldn't work out very well if I called an elevator and it's change state wasn't reported to others standing near me in view of that elevator until later. If I loot a crate and it's state isn't updated before the next player loots that crate items could be duplicated, or the player after me gets an inaccurate view of the contents. The ah ha moment when thinking about such things as firing missiles is that they don't 'magic them' just outside the ship, a player inside the ship who is a passenger has to see that missile go up the rail and out the ship, hopefully at the same time as the player making the fire missile command.

If 'full' persistence is to be achieved every single change state has to be recorded to the cache in a timely manner. Obviously with 3.18.0 this wasn't happening. They actually used the words, 'out of sync' when describing the issue.

What players assume is 'lag' in Star Citizen isn't the same type of lag in other multiplayer games.

This 'change of state' is what is recorded on the pCache according to it's parent item - an inventory is still a parent item. The reason we can have attach and detach of components now and not earlier is because of that Persistence Database storing each component and weapons state and attachment. It's the reason another player can watch a player attach and detach that weapon at virtually the same time. If it was 'client first' there would be instances of desync.

I don't want to sound pretentious but I've got so many of the damn things now and they change so often I can't remember what I have half the time.

The Carrack - S1r Shippy McCarrack
Star Runner - S1r Shippy McRunning Star
Reclaimer - S1r Shippy McSmasher
600i - S1r Shippy McSwellington.

My current daily driver is generally the Corsair. If I keep it then something piratical like - Salty Circe.

EDIT
Thinking about it the ship that makes me smile when I check my hangar is the Perseus, not because I like it more than the others but because it started life as a P72 and just kept growing. I think I'd name it S1r Shippy Maid of Pluck.

Nope. That's not correct. If you'd been following the full discussion up to now you might have questioned that assumption.

The Replication Layer Gateway (it's called a gateway because everything has to go through it) is a system that manages communication between the persistence database, the players and the shards. It has no function to store data. It's a traffic cop, not a scribe so describing it merely as a source doesn't cover it.

just looking at the system map pictogram in the OP should show you, the player clients don't connect directly to server nodes on a shard, they connect to the RL which simultaneously updates the persistence database (pCache, Entity Graph etc) and the server nodes on the shards.The persistence database information has to go through the Replication Layer Gateway to get to the server nodes on the shards.

It's right there, clear as day.

It's not so easy for those who keep comparing Star Citizen to other MMO's to grasp (I know you haven't but the ideas do take root) but there is a big difference between other games and SC regarding how actions are taken in the game - the players don't control anything directly, not even now without the RL. If players understood that they would understand why the game behaves the way it does when it isn't performing at peak. You click something and nothing seems to happen at first, then it does what you expected sometimes after a long wait or you go away and curse the game assuming it just isn't working. Most jump to the conclusion that a long delay after an action is requested by a player means 30K incoming. If that were the case, all player actions would stop for everyone because the server has already died.

In normal multiplayer games run on servers the player initiates an action on the PC client and they see the result of that action immediately, the change is then reported to the game server and the game server then sends that information out to all other connected clients. This is where game lag creeps in.

To deal with lag, a long time ago now, they changed the way player actions are executed and reported to each connected client. The player commands or initiates an action (flying into the ATC zone of a space station initiates an action), but it doesn't happen on the game client on their PC - that requested change state is sent to the DGS. The DGS waits a certain period of time to collect all inputs from player clients (a few milliseconds per cycle), then sends all the results of those collective actions out to all the connected clients at once, the aim being to cut down up/down lag by reducing the potential loss of simultaneity to only the down part of the communication to each client. You command an action and wait, the player stood next to you is watching, and both of you see the commanded action take place at the exact same time - that's the theory. Certain actions in the game are prioritised for this network communication, flight commands, driving commands, player locomotion commands and bullets. Lower down the food chain are cockpit chairs, lights, doors, elevators and of course the lowest of the low - inventories.

There was a bug being reported by players, if you knew why it was happening it was laugh out loud hilarious (to me at least). Players would fire a missile and a command was issued to detach the missile from the ship, the next automatic command for the missile is to start it's flight toward the target. Unfortunately because the 'start flight' command was a lower priority in the network stack so players were flying ahead of the missile and it hit them in the butt when it finally got it's command to fly baby fly!

They said that they had applied the same IFCS system to the missiles to fix the problem, the result of which is that now the priority for the fly baby fly command to the missile was at the same level as the player flight input commands - so no more smacking yourself in the butt... hopefully. Heh heh.

Part of the Replication Layer Gateway's function will be to take that 'collect all inputs' (change state reports) function off the DGS's so that it can simultaneously update the persistence database at the same time as informing the DGS's what actions have been taken by connected game clients. Again to reduce lag because if the players client is updated first, then the DGS's second, and only then the persistence database then the PES system is always going to be significantly lagging behind. Step four of course is that the DGS's are also taking information through the RL to update the game universe regarding things the players do not control (those inputs coming from other systems like the NPC Scheduler - that's why the NPC's are so dozy and slow sometimes, they are way lower on the priority for network traffic than the player) since EVERYTHING is recorded on the persistence database, not just what the players are doing.

The Replication Layer Gateway is a time keeper with a stop watch managing all timestamped information coming in and out from all sources, sorting it, prioritising it and sending it out again to each connected part of the whole system that 'does something' with that data it is managing. It is the drummers beat all other systems follow and synchronise with. It replicates data out to multiple systems simultaneously.

Get it now? Replication (of data to multiple systems)? Layer (information sorted, prioritised coming from the stack of connected services)? Gateway?

I'm replying to my own post here to make a point:

You'll hear some say 'They dumped all the work on iCache! So incompetent!'

When you read this you can shake your head at these poorly informed keyboard worriers because CIG didn't dump iCache, they simply reworked the tool that uses the iCache database to order the data and search function more efficiently and renamed the upgraded iCache to pCache. The application they wrote to do that database management was Entity Graph. No-one would suggest re-ordering the information in a phone book to make it more efficient to search meant having to rebuild the whole telephony system from scratch. They wouldn't have to reinvent the telephone or reinvent the computer that did the searches and made entries to the phone book, they just write a new application for the computer to run that manages the phone book and search queries. Did putting all the parts that make the whole persistence system take longer than they thought? Sure, but that's not exactly new in the world of game development is it?

The process by which the DGS queries Entity Graph to search the pCache database and retrieve information to put items into the game is called Persistent Entity Streaming. When you look at the timeline of the tool building tech milestones (in the OP) what isn't immediately clear is that each item named can be part of a system, once the whole system is named they don't mention the individual items in that system again - they just talk about the whole system. Right now the whole system is PES because the individual parts are done.

No, the database of items in the game was originally called the Item Cache (it was on the DGS originally so it had no persistence when the server spun down) - when they switched to the graph system for storing data about each item they just moved ICache to be remote from the DGS which used the network to query the database, when found to be inefficient they wrote a management app that ran remote to the DGS, they gave the database another name pCache. It's the same thing except the data is organised differently, instead of sequential ordering of hash string identifiers for each item it is now graphed according to parent items. You can see the logic behind the sequence, the servers shutting down destroyed the iCache data so they moved it off the DGS, the app querying it was still on the DGS as part of the game build. When the number of items burgeoned they knew they had to restructure the iCache, so they broke off the app from the game build and wrote a standalone app to manage the database simpler and easier to put it on the same server as the database - voila Entity Graph. taking the app of the dedicated game server has the added benefit of reducing the CPU load for the running dedicated game server.

To do a search query of iCache you'd start at number one and go sequentially, the game grew to millions of items and is expected to increase to billions of items, so sequential item look ups was far too slow and laborious, imagine if they ordered the information in a phone directory by numerical order of the phone number, you'd have to go through every number to see which had the name of the person attached to that number you were trying to find. That would be woefully inefficient you have to search through all the information you don't know to find the information about the person whose name you did know to start off with.

pCache via Entity Graph does it's search queries by parent connection, which means there no 'stop and check' for every single item on the database. Only those items that are connected to one another are search queried, reducing network traffic.

Let me give a real game scenario (very simplified):
We have the new tractor beam coming with attach and detach function. A gun is attached to the entity 'ship' (item 97) at item port number 6, the ship is it's parent item. The ship is on a planet - the planet is it's parent item, the planet is in the Stanton system so the Stanton system (the game universe as it stands) is the planets parent item.

If we still had iCache and that gun had a hash string identifier 900,000 then the old system had to search every item in the game's item database to find the gun. From 1 - 900,000. (this for every single item search query in the game)

With pCache the search starts: game universe identifier (item 01), planet identifier (there's four), ship identifier (maybe a few hundred) on that planet. It doesn't have to search ships that aren't on that planet. Now find the identifier for that specific gun on that ship (maybe between 2 and 24 identifiers to search) and the DGS says it's detaching that gun item from it's parent ship - so that report of your tractor beam activity goes to the database to update that gun items status. It's parent item is about to be changed.

When you use the detach tool it takes that gun with it's hash string identifier removes it from it's parent ship and transfers the gun to the item identifier of wherever you place it - let's say you place on the ground - it's parent item is now the planet (we'll cal it planet with item identifier number 04). So if you log out and back in at a later time and go looking for that gun the DGS taking it's data from pCache says that gun with it's identifier was last attached to the parent planet item number 04 at these coordinates - so search the planet 04 in the pCache database - not the whole item database. Entity Graph is the tool that makes new entries into pCache, deletes entries from the pCache, moves items on the pCache from one parent to another and conducts searches of the pCache.

That's why it's called 'persistence cache' because the static entry for that specific gun item on the database remains even after the DGS has shut down and spun up again. On spin up the DGS queries pCache (using the Entity Graph system) about all the items it should have on that planet (Item 04) and places them where the pCache says they last were attached. So you'll find the gun exactly where you left it.

They're just low poly placeholders for now, when Server Meshing reduces server resource requirements they'll probably replace the low poly models.

Both the rivers and roads need a tool that does two things:

A. Permanently deforms terrain.
C. Clears the area of scattered objects such as rocks and trees.

** It's worth noting that when the 'river guy' first showed the river making tool he also showed how he could deform terrain using a grenade launcher - roads with deep blast pits in them eh?

The river creation tool does both of those things. The level designers have access to a set of pre-made assets which come with the level design tools - trees, rocks of different shapes and sizes, plants etc.

They have chosen to go with rivers first, why? We haven't been told specifically but we can hazard guesses. Roads have to be more level than rivers, you can put rapids and waterfalls for rivers, and their placement cannot be random like rivers there cannot be unevenness when a part of a road connects to another road or to go over a bridge. Roads go over terrain, they don't generally cut through it like rivers. On ramps and off ramps have to be flush to the terrain at their junctions and more accurately aligned than rivers.

Roads have to start somewhere worth going to and end somewhere worth going to otherwise they are not useful, this means they necessarily encroach on areas where there are pre-determined POI's, anyone starting a road, or ending a road has to liaise with the level designers who placed those POI's or even the asset creators who designed and made those POI's. The 3D modellers who made the POI's and Level Designers who place those POI's would have to make entry and exit roads, by hand, that connect seamlessly to the procedurally generated roads.

Roads need 'furniture' like signs, street lights (ship lights are already a vexed issue!), tunnels, bridges and barriers, rivers don't need those things, they generally use the pre-existing planetary tech tool assets like rocks and trees. There can be rivers without bridges, but there can't be long terrain crossing roads without bridges, that would be unrealistic, terrain gradients have to gradual or spanned either overground or underground. There is no way they can do all of that at scale by hand.

Bridges are a lot of complex work in games, because they necessarily have to be 'curvy' which makes them expensive**, especially if you need a way to auto-generate them rather than do it by hand for each one. They will need to design a specific tool to place and align roads, junctions, tunnels and bridges. A road that just hovers above terrain looks terrible, a road that has abrupt boundaries and excessively steep slopes is unusable.

Given the very large distances involved you would also have to consider roadside services for refuelling, repair, habitation and trading etc.

Creating roads with all the work it entails simply for the fun of 'the open road' happily going nowhere isn't really the sort of design decision that's going to get made.

Since there will be an AI NPC population CIG dev's would also have to consider how those assets use the roads.

Prior to importing real world orthographic data other games - such as flight simulators - were plagued by issues which are apparent when close to the ground but good enough from a couple of thousand feet up. There is no 'real world' orthographic data for non-Earth planets. The reason you can't jump into your car and drive to the airport in games such as Microsoft Simulator and XPlane 11, despite decades of iterative development and billions in revenue is because in no small part they haven't cracked the problem of roads.

All in all rivers are the simpler 'add'' for the game right now, roads are more complex. But yes, they have stated many times we will get roads and a first attempt at making roads (short dirt tracks really) has already taken place when they made the planet Hurston.

As an aside - creating a road creation tool that works with spherical grid planets where they are believable and useable is several orders of magnitude more complex than creating the flight model. If CIG could make such a tool - so that those roads and furniture don't have to be hand made - it would be a tool that many other game creation companies would pay good money to license from CIG, especially if they came coupled with the planetary tech tools.

*POI = Point Of Interest. a place to go 'do something'.

** 3D models in games are made of vertices (1 dimensional points in 3D space), lines (2 Dimensional) and faces (2 dimensional). The apparent size of the model is immaterial. A square box is made of 8 vertices, 12 lines (18 if your game engine uses triangles instead of polygons) and 6 faces (12 for triangles) those have to be loaded into Random Access Memory from the hard drive. A sphere that looks smooth with gradual curves so the faces aren't so flat takes hundreds or even thousands of vertices, lines and faces and this is why they are more 'expensive' on system resources.

Any change in level of a road would need to have gradual curves or else if you drove over it you'd notice abrupt changes in the vehicles angle to the flat terrain - again this requires more vertices, lines and faces. If there are hundreds of bridges with on and off ramps, and other on and off ramps or even just hills and bumps on roads that is very expensive on the players PC resources and the game server resources (there's no way roads go in before Server Meshing). It also increases the size of the game download. Because roads have to have collision physics they can't fake these curves, we expect water to be be flat and level, it doesn't have to be bumpy and curvy like a road.

This is the reality of a community, some keep up and pay attention, some have their biases and become entrenched in them. If you watch the very last video from Chris and Richard Tyrer you'd know that your assertion is erroneous. I also suggest you watch the Squadron 42 Q&A with Chris Roberts.

I won't link them because I don't think you'd bother watching them even if I did, you clearly haven't up to now, or you have and are being disingenuous.

You know.. you can still do the 'buy to melt' with CCU's and concept ships, and you don't need cash to buy from the store unless it's warbond. Your future self might thank you for it.

Yeah.. pCache is a part of a few systems they now describe as Entity Graph, it's not surprising people aren't so familiar with it they only mentioned it once very briefly when they said they did away with iCache and made the Entity Graph system. It's a collective term, Entity Graph is the way the information is written to and read from the database, not just the database itself. If pCache is equivalent to your Windows Registry, Entity Graph is Windows Explorer.

You've got it the wrong way around, iCache was a simple linear sequential look up static database and those look ups took too long so it didn't scale to the size they needed which is why they switched to a graphed database (the type they use in customer service environments) which suits the hierarchical structure of entities in the game - the nested Russian-doll-like Object Container system.

Every single item in the game has a unique hash string identifier attached to it. iCache was arranged for sequential look ups of each item according to it's hash string. The graph database has data organised by it's connection to the topmost item (the parent). So you only need to find the topmost item and run down the tree branches to get to each individual leaf - it's faster than checking all the leaves on the tree, in numerical order, to find the right one you're looking for. The hard copy record of all the leaves is pCache, the way you go up and down the branches to find those leaves, or to make new ones or delete them, is Entity Graph.

EDIT:
iCache = Item Cache database. In very old videos mostly pre OCS introduction you'll hear Chris talk about the Item Cache.
pCache = Persistence Cache database.

When I make posts describing why strange things happen in the game I refer to the 'Persistence Database' to make it easier, there's really not much point describing the system (Entity Graph) in such general posts because all people care about is that there is a search and management system of that database and it works.

There's a couple of things to remember:

No great change happened easily. If all you are doing is copying what everyone else does then yeah sure it's game building using a known set of tools and that is something you can quantify. When you're building the systems and tools as well as building the game it's a darn sight harder to quantify. We all knew that coming in, definitely anyone who joined after 2014 SHOULD know that.

Sure, everyone who joined the Kickstarter was happy with the original plan, but when it became obvious we could go far bigger and far better only a minority weren't saying do it, do it, do it! Chris had a choice, stick to the plan and perhaps waste this golden opportunity, or trust his community and go for it even though he knew it would take many more years of his life to achieve.

The community had it's ideas of what the BDSSE should look like and Chris had his ideas of what the BDSSSE should look like and the output is an amalgam of both - this never happens in any other game development. We can push the boundaries precisely because we found a development team and said to them.. whatever you need, either time or money, we'll get it to you so that you don' have to limit yourselves or OUR game... and that definitely never happens in other game development. It was the community who told CIG you don't need to advertise the game, we'll do that. It was the community who demanded that CIG don't take a penny from the development funds to make entertaining and informative videos etc, that's why we have subscribers.

That is what this project is all about. Without it we would have had Chris's 2016 version of Starfield. Some may have been very happy with that, but obviously enough in the community let them know - we want MORE! Since December 23rd 2015 when the PU went live we HAVE been getting more than was originally planned. It was the community who howled in derision when they unveiled their 'loading screen to land' (just like you're going to get in starfield), and they demanded we have seamless flight from space to ground with no invisible walls to prevent free roam. Chris originally said 'No' but one of the dev team in Frankfurt heard the community and in his own time made it possible and presented it to Chris. The impossible became possible because of the community's will to make it so.

So here we are paying for MORE with time. Daring to dream bigger. It's a community effort, a collective where the dev team are just another part of that community. Anyone who doesn't like it can do what they do with any other game they are waiting for, what do you know about GTA 6? Why aren't the fans of GTA over there demanding to know why it's taking so damn long, or what's going to be in it?

Yep, that's it exactly, the Persistence Cache or pCache (formerly iCache) had to come first and it is needing some 'bedding in'.

Right now every DGS is having to report the change states for all entities in the Stanton system directly to the pCache, on spin up every DGS is having to network query the pCache for the current state of the game universe and stream it into the servers RAM (PES) - there is a lot of replication of data and the network to and from the DGS is not performing adequately to keep the pCache up to date so it is getting out of sync, it's connected to a network of separated independently running DGS's that are spinning up and down all the time firing in to the pCache data about multiple Stanton systems - the pCache database has been running continuously since 3.18.0 went to Live.

The Replication Layer Gateway will get between the DGS's and pCache and record a continuous timed snapshot of the current state of the Live verse (a still image in time in a picture frame if you will) but without the overhead of holding all the Stanton entities and players ie running a live game which is updated from the pCache. The reset that is coming is to re-set the pCache to 'midnight' again as it were - wipe the image clean and start drawing it again. Separating the Replication Layer to an expandable system will allow that 'up' and 'down' data to be spread over more servers each with their own network bandwidth scaled to not get overloaded.

The game universe time is synchronised to the hundredths of a second across all running DGS's. Each entity change state report has a timestamp.

This change state idea is an important one to grasp. Every entity in the game - a ships gun, the turret, the doors, the doors of the hangars, the elevators and even individual bullets - are all entities that can do something, their state can change. The pCache records a static image of all the entities (it's just a static database to query) - for arguments sake let's say every 10 milliseconds - each DGS is sending data about the current state of every entity to the Pcache as fast as it can, and it's also querying the pCache about each entity recorded on it to update it's view of the current game universe all while running the game for the connected clients. The pCache is not dynamic in the sense that changes happen on it, it's like a video stream where each frozen in time frame is recorded. The Replication Layer doesn't run the game universe for clients and it can decide if data is being replicated (redundant unchanged states of entities), or if it's out of date, from each DGS and streamline the data going to and from the pCache, now each DGS doesn't have to decide the difference between 'currently reported by DGS' state of each entity and compare it to the state of that entity in the pCache - it's change state - the RL does it. The Replication Layer currently isn't taking network traffic from each connected client - the players PC - like the DGS has to, because it doesn't exist but when it does it will take that network traffic off the DGS's. The player client input goes to the RL gets timestamp sorted and prioritised and sent to the pCache, the pCache data is collected by the DGS to update the game entities.

It still won't be optimal though until each DGS is only holding a part of the Stanton system - ie meshing. Once SM goes in the amount of network traffic each DGS generates will reduce significantly, and the DGS mesh can be expandable as needed to maintain a lower network output per DGS.

Basically they couldn't both build the block systems and put them in place, then expand the backend and the frontend at the same time, one had to be done first - so it was the backend. pCache goes in first and gets tested (3.18.0), then the Replication Layer and it will be tested, then Server Meshing.

Server Meshing is splitting up the game build that each server holds so that each DGS holds just a part of the whole game universe, in the first instance it will be static so that each DGS will only get a part of the game universe and it can't expand beyond that part, in practise it's game universe borders are fixed. Dynamic SM means that any DGS server could scale up to the full game universe as player loads demand as well as splitting the game universe over several 'expandable' sections of the verse, it streams out what players leave behind and streams in where the players are going (almost exactly like SSOCS) - as Chris said Static Server Meshing the easier part.

Regarding the naysayers.. they said OCS / SSOCS wouldn't happen or be a disaster too, at the time.

They'll get it to work because they always do, they have a plan. Since no-one has ever tried something like this before there are bound to be wrinkles that are unforeseen... but we CAN see the pCache (Persistence) is working which is pretty neat because the system they used to build the pCache originally came from the business world of customer databases, they adapted this business database type structure after the iCache didn't perform as they needed. That's what they do, they look around and grab solutions no-one else would think to try.

That is the plan for the Reliant MAKO News Van, for players to be able to make and stream video content inside the game, to roleplay being a news reporter. There is no 'faster than light' communication in the game. You need to record and edit footage then send it to the comms satellites to send that video to other star systems, local can be livestreamed probably.

If you want to see the News Van editing suite being used it's in the Jax McCleary video where he goes to save Jimmy doing a solo attack on the Hammerhead. Jax is talking to someone using that editing suite.

That's what this project is about - making it all possible. That's why they spend much more time than any other game developer making the tools to make it possible.

You are like most looking at the current Star Citizen alpha and thinking this is substantially what the Star Citizen universe is to become, maybe with a few more places and player professions added - it isn't even close. The current Alpha is a tiny test-bed of features they want to test at scale.

Full Persistence - why? Why bother with all the trouble it brings like gowns and ship wrecks littering the place?
It's because the final game will have a universe simulated (as realistically as they can make it) that runs permanently whether there are any players around to see it or not. Hardly anyone has noticed, or commented on, that the persistence database has been running continuously since 3.18.0 went live - that is why it needs to be reset because as in all things the first run is never perfect. That is the plan, to have an endlessly running universe simulator so that there can be dynamic populations, a dynamic economy, a dynamic schedule of events, natural disasters and wars and pandemics. Places will boom and bust, things will age, some things will be destroyed and some things will be built, there will be mass migrations of populations, tourism that both the NPC AI and players can engage in - it is not going to be static like other games.

The servers are designed to run inter-connected cloud services, that's why they use AWS rather than the simpler backbone that other multiplayer games use. What would be the point of doing the R&D for things like Object Container Streaming, Quantum, Quasar, the DNA system if Cloud Imperium were simply taking the same approach as other games? There wouldn't be any point.

People see things going on on the RSI website like lore posts, little snippets of shows like Empire Report, Imperator elections, faction fighting, The Spectrum - they think it is just 'lore flavour' like other games. They think things like whale watching on Orison, Murray Cup Racing, Invictus Launch Week, Intergalactic Aerospace Expo, the Hadesian Artifact are just scripted one off events a McGuffin for a mission that has no other meaning or effect once completed, or made up modules that only players will experience and that don't connect to the daily life of this permanently running 'Living Breathing Universe'.

Star Citizen and Squadron 42 are about players being able to create their own unique character and story arc and live the life of that character in an ever evolving dynamic universe.

Players will log into the game, as they do now and they will do their stuff - but in the future a big part of the Star Citizen experience will be FOMO - because there's always something going on somewhere in the game universe every minute of every single day and you can watch it, read about it and follow it all on The Spectrum. You can contribute to The Spectrum using equipment like the Reliant MAKO News Van. Why would a game that is only for dog-fighting and trading have a ship equipped with cameras and an editing suite? Why is it that people who follow the game's development don't even ask the obvious questions about things like this? Why on Earth would they spend so much time and money on 'lore flavour' before the game is even close to being ready for primetime?

You'll be able to follow all the events going on in this living breathing universe on other platforms like mobiles and streaming media. Star Citizen is going to be the most streamed game of any other, because when you're not logged in watching it all will be the only way to keep up with all that's going on. It is going to be the content makers dream game because it's always changing, there's always something happening. Politics, faction fighting, celebrities and their antics, famous criminals. The Galactapedia isn't just some background reading for those who like to immerse themselves, it will be an essential guide to players if they want to make their way in this universe because the most valuable commodity of all in this game universe like no other - is knowledge, up to the second, up to date knowledge.

Don't look at all the parts and assume they aren't intimately connected. Don't look at what there is now and assume that is what they are aiming for. It isn't even close to what's coming. People think development is slow and expensive - in the future they'll be wondering how did they do all of that so fast and with so little money compared to other game's budgets.

If you want to immerse yourself in the daily whining and gripes of the impatient and unimaginative then you are missing the best part of all of this - taking part in something, seeing something truly massive, magnificent and unique being brought into the world - there is, and likely will be, nothing else like it for a very long time to come. It isn't just a game, it has always intended to be a long running franchise like Star Wars or Star Trek, except you can live in it. It's early days yet (yes I know 10 years, but small can be made quick and this ISN'T small), the foundations are still being put in. It's hard for people to see the amazing, never imagined before, structure that will be built on those foundations.

Your feeling is correct. There is work that has been done (even if in some cases it is just preparation work) that cannot go into the PU because of server workload prior to Server Meshing.

People often think that simple player numbers are all that affect the running of servers and how they communicate with backend systems, but that is only half the story, when a server is running all of the Stanton system it means that individual server must communicate all the network traffic to and from the backend systems like PES. When a server holds only a small part of the Stanton system (or other planetary system) then it's network bandwidth requirement, and the CPU/RAM required to produce/receive that network traffic data is significantly reduced.

That will be the plan, your prison time only ticks down while online, however the jails are for short term, the rehab centres for medium term and the Quarterdeck prison planet is for longer term. Quarterdeck will have more 'game' than a lot of fully released games. Some people may purposefully get themselves sent to Quarterdeck because they prefer the game there.

What the OP, and many, are forgetting is that the laws vary wherever you are in the game. There is no 'law' in the unclaimed systems.

..and it seems you have no idea about the limitations of the current servers (or how bad it was when the PU first launched) and what all the tech milestones were about... which means you don't understand why Server Meshing is needed. Or do you think they should just stop work on all the assets until the servers are fully ready to handle all the load?

How about just letting the professionals do their job, the way they know best? It's still just one game universe.

Has it occurred to anyone that marketing campaigns are planned and paid for well in advance?

Bug fixing goes on throughout the life of the project, 3.18.X is no different. In a few weeks (hopefully) all this fuss will be a memory. They've just put in a major tech pillar, one that is unique to this game at this scale - who wasn't expecting it to have teething issues? Anyone responding to those ad's gets the same information we all get - the game is in Alpha.

..and will you complain when everyone else gets the benefits in the PU of what that work on Squadron 42 brings?

You want to stay in Stanton, you don't want to visit the star systems in Squadron 42 that will come to the PU?
You want to keep EVA tier 0?
You want to keep the current Star Map in the PU?
You don't want to see / use The Spectrum in the PU?
You don't want to see fire propagation in the PU?
You don't want the updated ship HUD's?
You don't want the ability to stop on a ladder and shoot with one hand, or jump from the ladder onto something else?
You don't want the new flight model with Master Mode?
You don't want to earn the right to own and operate all the top tier military gear in Squadron 42 like the F8C Lightning heavy fighter that won't be available in the RSI store and will only be available for ex-military pilots in the PU unless you're a Chairman's Cub Member with over $10,000 on your account in which case why are you fretting about $15?
You don't want to take your Squadron 42 character with all history, reputation, awards and earnings into the PU when you retire from the military?
You want to grind for citizenship status for months in the PU instead of being awarded it automatically on day one just because you enrolled in the military in Squadron 42?
You don't want the alien races or alien creatures in the PU?

OK.

It's not two games, it's one game, you play the same character in both games - if you want to. Squadron 42 is basically one giant dynamic mission inside the Star Citizen Universe, only set in the past from the standpoint of the PU. If you only join the PU you aren't getting a different game, you're starting the same game only later than players who started Squadron 42.

Some things needed to be tested in the PU with a large player base, those that don't get developed and tested in Squadron 42... all for the same game. Squadron 42 is nothing like Call of Duty or GTA with a tacked on multiplayer - it's the same game... just set in different times.

I'll make a prediction: If you don't stump up the extra $15 at big discount before release, you're going to feel like a proper numpty when you realise all the things you miss in the PU because you didn't get Squadron 42 while you could. Extra missions, places only ex-military can go, all the gear which is only legal to own and operate by ex-military, all the rep with the military and Advocacy - higher security clearances. Pay less tax, vote in Senatorial and Imperator elections. Allowed to own 'vital to the UEE' production nodes.

The persistence database has been running continuously since 3.18.0 went live, because of network issues it has been getting more and more out of sync with what the players are doing on the live servers.

They have to find the network issues and reset the corrupted database which is causing all the in-game issues. Anymore network issues that show up after the reset to zero then have to be dealt with and once they are they'll reset to start the PES database clock running again and it will continue running permanently unless there is another reset needed.

Well it's great you link to all the Issue Council bugs.. but.. these are all PES related, every one of them.

Let's start with an analogy. Someone takes their car to the mechanic because it's not working as they expect. They turn it on and put it in gear (drive), they don't know how an internal combustion engine works they just know how to use it.
The driver leaves the car with the mechanic and comes back and says..

Driver: The car just keeps stalling
Mechanic: Yes, because you had a partial blockage in the radiator hose.
Driver: The engine temperature light keeps coming on.
Mechanic: Yes, because you had a partial blocakge in the radiator hose.
Driver: The oil warning light kept coming on.
Mechanic: Yes, because you had a partial blockage in the radiator hose.

Driver: Have you fixed the stalling issue?
Mechanic:Yes, we've replaced the radiator hose.
Driver: Have you fixed the engine temperature issue?
Mechanic: Yes, we've replaced the radiator hose.
Driver: Have you fixed what's causing the oil warning light to come on?
Mechanic: Yes, we replaced the radiator hose.

When you understand how the game works, and how PES touches absolutely everything in the game all of these bugs make sense, they're all part of the same problem. They have said they are resetting these databases because they have become out of synch with what the players are doing in the game universe, of course all anyone cares about is the 'wipe' is about reputation and aUEC, but it isn't.

PES is like a video camera, it stores snapshot images over time of where everything, literally everything, in the game is and what it's current state is. Because of slow network things get out of synch. The video frames are late, jumbled up or even missing completely - the video becomes unwatchable.

The PES database was started running the second 3.18.0 went to live - and it never stops... until the reset for 3.18.1 hits the live servers.

This is the way the game currently works:
Server spins up to level designer made static state, before any player is logged in the server state is updated by the PES registry to current universe state --->You initiate a 'change state' for some entity on your game client ----> entity change state registers on PES registry ---> PES registry updates all connected game clients about the state of all entities in the game universe. Any late registry entry, or even missed registry entry, is going to make everything go wonky and appear to do really wacky stuff.

When testing the PTU for example I saw the bug where you drag something from a loot box and it appears to go into your personal inventory then after about a half a second (or longer) it disappears from your inventory and re-appears back in the loot box, if you waited - sometimes up to a few minutes you see the reverse happen, the item disappears from the loot box and appears in the personal inventory. This is because your game client let's you see your initial action, but it hasn't updated the persistence database yet, so the game is then updated by PES but the change you made hasn't reached the the PES database yet, the game is getting an 'out of date update' - it's out of synch. After some time your queue for registering that loot item on PES , the 'state change' of the loot item, registers with PES and now the action you took registers in the game. Or, for some reason the network message never got through either on the 'up' to PES, or the 'down' from PES to your game client.

For someone who is dragging items out of a loot box, or from local inventory to ship inventory, then immediately moving on they think, the items did go into my inventory but then disappeared - of course they can't see that it went back to the loot box or local inventory for a time. So they say.. 'it just disappeared'. Or it may be the 'down' PES message doesn't get through, so again the inventory is not updated that item appears 'gone'.

You think, I ordered the hangar doors opened and on my game client those hangar doors are open - but that change state hasn't reached the PES database yet and so it thinks the doors are still closed. You fly toward the doors and explode because the game persistence registry says.. That ship just crashed into closed doors according to the information I have received. You think 'I landed on the pad and then randomly blew up', the persistence registry doesn't know you reached the pad, it thinks you blew up at the doors, so the next time the PES registry updates the game it just says - the ship exploded. Even if you stored your ship, the last persistence registry entry that 'got there' says - no.. that ship was completely damaged, so the next time it gets loaded into the game and the PES registry is queried for the state of that ship... Boom! Exactly the same with the location of your ship, the PES registry has your ship back home even though you flew it and even stored it somewhere else during your last play session.

People say..Why is CIG wiping credits from my wallet? Or.. Why is CIG resetting my bounty hunter status / rep status? They aren't, the money in your wallet and bounty hunter status you got during your last play session never made it to the persistence database before you logged off. So next time you log on and the persistence database is queried it gives your game client the last information it had, it doesn't know what you did for part of your last play session.

That's why they are resetting the databases, that's why there has to be a complete full wipe, when a server first spins up it queries the PES registry to ask - where is everything and what is it's current state?'It's not like the old days when everything started from a base setting. - the first reset is a test to see if the network issues are resolved, and the next reset to is a return to starting point once they dealt with any issues that arose from the first test reset. Remember the PES database has been running continuously, getting more and more out of synch, since 3.18.0 went live. It's like winding the clock back to midnight and letting it run.. see if it's on time, if it isn't you try a fix then you wind it back to midnight and let it run again.

Everyone thinks 'they're just ignoring all the IC bugs!' - no they aren't - they know what's causing them so there's no point in addressing them individually, and in their last TWISC they say they are fixing those persistence database network issues... so those bugs will all go away, unless they have another cause.

I think the plan is that they allow you to have the controls to make it as simple or complex as you wish. As I said you can play with the individual thruster settings to get the effect you want right now, it's just that there's no way currently to save those settings and re-apply them. I'm sure in the future there will be.

They weren't downstream teams when the Progress Tacker first started and it's possible they will be re-assigned as upstream teams when work on new features is undertaken. It's also the case that they aren't exactly fastidious about updating the Roadmap Companion when changes are made to teams activity.

The narrative team do pick up work (and extra dialogue for non-story peripheral NPC's etc) for Squadron 42 even after all the main story has been fixed, the narrative team also do work on PU missions - so they will always be doing work as long as the PU is having content added.

The planet tech team both build planets and have to come back and update those planets / moons according to improvements made with the planet tech tools and the work done by level designers and environment artists, and other terrain feature tools such as rivers, roads and caves.We know they plan to significantly upgrade the weather systems, but that work is unlikely to be completed and put into the game before PES and Server Meshing are finalised.

This is misleading, I understand why you make that statement but it is not the case.

If the Magnus system is in a chapter of Squadron 42 then only work on that chapter will be represented on the Progress Tracker, not work on a specific location or asset in Squadron 42. We can look at the teams assigned and surmise what that content in the chapter listing might be, we can cross reference that with the monthly reports. According to the Progress Tracker the only team working on any chapter of Squadron 42 is the Vehicle Feature Team - we know that isn't the case, because they aren't the only ones mentioned in Squadron 42 monthly reports, and there is nothing in Squadron 42 that isn't in a chapter.

The Progress Tracker also lists items where teams are only working part time on a feature, and so it is (deliberately?) obscured exactly how many are working on that feature and for how long, because if there is 1 days work on April 1st, and another 2 days work on September 30th and 31st it is still represented as 6 months continuous part-time assigned work for an upstream team. The EUPU team was assigned anti-gravity for 53 weeks, but because it is marked as pat time we have no idea what proportion of that 53 weeks they actually worked on it, or what proportion of the EUPU team did the actual work. The Progress Tracker was carefully designed to only give the information they wish to give... which is why the old one was discontinued.

We also have been told that not everything is put onto the Progress Tracker, and there are items on the Progress Tracker that are listed as 'unannounced' with a short description and the number of teams working on that unannounced feature. Because they know we scrutinise everything and are perfectly capable of extrapolating from information given, to avoid giving information about an item they simply won't add that item or feature to the Progress Tracker. In monthly reports they state specifically they are still continuing work on the Pyro system, but that monthly-report-mentioned specific work is not represented on the Progress Tracker. Also mentioned in monthly reports and the last SC Live is continuing work on the AI, yet the Progress Tracker says all assigned work on AI has ceased since the middle of February.

The idea that simply because information is not shown on the Progress Tracker means there is no work being done is erroneous. We are given multiple sources of information regarding work done. They are very careful to curate and cross reference what information is put on the Progress Tracker to avoid spoilers. it is not simply a case of grabbing all the JIRA's and dumping that information onto the Progress Tracker when they get around to it, they do carefully filter what they put on the Progress Tracker, which is very probably why it is often updated late.

I think it is also worth pointing out that as Squadron 42 becomes feature complete less and less information is going to go on the Progress Tracker about it. It is also the case that when they mention work on Squadron 42 features we have no idea at what stage that work is, if it's work flagged by QA to be re-looked at, they can still say work is ongoing on that feature. They have no requirement to state in any communication - the only reason that feature has landed back on our desks is because QA play-tested it and found issues.

There were 34 teams assigned to 'Bug Fixing and Tech Debt' and 'Miscellaneous Support' over last year which is really a non-spoiler catch-all term for widespread QA testing and any work that results from it - expect those two Progress Tracker items to be filled out in the next update for the block 6 or 12 months because those two items will remain even after a full release, and there is no way for us, or even them, to know how long that process will last.

Why? There are Youtubers and Twitch streamers playing 3.18.0 and uploading / streaming it.. and the PTU. Yes, there are some having difficulty - perhaps more than normal - but plenty are able to log in. I've been able to log in after just over 2 weeks of not being able to. It's not the most stable build I've experienced but I can get in. Individual experiences may vary.

It's Ok to be impatient when they state they have released a final game.. while it's in alpha the expectation is they will do what they need to do for the good of the project overall. The 3.18.0 PTU was working fine, many of us played it and had minimal issues. Those issues only surfaced when it wen to the much wider player base.

Rolling back to 3.17.X because some players are having difficulty would not help with that wider testing at scale. The 3.18.0 PTU proved that.

It depends on what the bottle-neck in each individual PC system is. If you have a multi-core CPU which is currently being under-utilised by the game then you will see improvement initially, for example I have a Ryzen 3900X with a GTX 1080Ti, the CPU is running around 50% or less while the GPU is at 100%. So Vulkan will improve my CPU performance, but not so much the GPU. If you have a CPU and GPU that are maxed out you might see some performance gain initially, but it's not likely to be dramatic and when they up the workload (as expected) then the same limitations of the hardware will be apparent.

The biggest limiting factor is VRAM currently, anything less than 8GB will struggle with or without Vulkan. That's why 32GB RAM is recommended by the players because some of the VRAM load is taken up by RAM.

Gravity is accurately modelled in SC, if you hover above a planet and turn off your engines you WILL eventually crash down to the surface... I know I've tried it. The thrusters in Star Citizen are not the rocket engines of Flight of Nova, they are so powerful that they can easily kill you and they can fairly easily take you out of a gravity well formed by a planetary body, they need to do that because dog-fighting in space requires such powerful thrusters, without which any space manoeuvring would be long and tedious. You'll notice the section of the video where the player docks with the space station is speeded up - and people complain about the 3 or 4 minutes train or shuttle ride in Star Citizen - if you took 10 or 12 minutes just to dock with every space station how would the average player react to that? Even spacecraft now have computers to do those positioning and docking manoeuvres, exactly like the IFCS system the primary goal of those flight computers is to keep the humans alive at the end of it.

When comparing Star Citizen to games like KSP the thing they forget is how many times you die just doing manoeuvres in KSP.

The thing that stops you going into orbit in SC are the automatic 'station keeping' systems of the IFCS (if you go to external view in SC you'll see the manoeuvring thrusters are always firing even without inputs, if you run out of hydrogen fuel or have disabled thrusters you will crash and burn), currently the only way to turn off all IFCS functions is to completely power down, presumably there will be other options in the future, even taking out the computers altogether from their component bays.

You can set individual power limits and thrust levels via the MFD's in your ship, and you'll see how it affects your flight characteristics, but basically no-one does - why would you gimp yourself if you don't have to? Those who complain about the way ships handle, why aren't you making videos of you trying out different thruster settings? The dev's who set flight characteristics have said they only use the same settings the players have access to. It's very complex to get the balance right for all scenarios, THAT'S WHY we have such a sophisticated IFCS system. If you want to spend dozens of hours tweaking thruster settings, only to have to redo all of them because you had to reclaim the ship when you f'up - have at it. If you choose thruster settings that give a pleasing looking 'with inertia' flight at Daymar, you better not go near Hurston because if you do you'll drop like a stone.

Speeds are limited in Star Citizen only because they have accurately modelled G force effects on the player, and so again unlike in the OP's video, to limit G force excesses on the human body they limit max velocities, it's a safety limit imposed by the IFCS, not an artificial limit. Sure you could go up to 4000m/s but then you'd have to spend 20 minutes or so doing retro burns that didn't kill you. You can do retro burns from very high speeds in Star Citizen, but you won't see much on screen because it simulates blackout and red-out. The alternative is to have you doing retro burns for many minutes at a time to avoid such high G forces. Star Citizen does have fully modelled and accurate Newtonian physics, but unlike FoN and KSP those Newtonian physics apply to EVERYTHING IN THE GAME not just the ships.

When he says that it looks great that things fly off your ship if you bump something, yeah nice, but it didn't affect the way the ship handled did it? There were no 'Major Torque Imbalance' red warnings on the screen.

What people say they want and the results of what they actually want are not the same things. I know people don't like to hear it but the flight model is still a work in progress, and it works well enough right now to test other things in the game. We know, because they have told us, that they have worked on a different flight model in Squadron 42 which will come to the PU eventually. The servers are at capacity with what they have now, adding the extra complexity of orbital trajectories for space stations, planets and moons IS possible, but not a priority.

It's worth pointing out that in the OP's video the space station was in the equivalent of LEO, it wasn't in geostationary orbit where even with fully modelled physics the planet absolutely would look 'unmoving' below you - that what's geostationary means. In Low Earth Orbit the International Space Station has to keep making thruster burns to maintain orbit because of atmospheric drag, that same amtospheric drag is in Star Citizen.

They have shown us that the improved flight model will accurately model aerodynamic forces on ships in atmosphere, not just one atmosphere and gravity, but all the different ones in the game. KSP doesn't have that.

Everything in the video is possible in Star Citizen, that game doesn't have the complex IFCS system that Star Citizen has, and that game doesn't accurately model the G force effects on the player from I can see in the video provided.. and here's one reason why.. in that game you can't leave the cockpit and go walking around inside your ship while all those maneouvres are taking place, there are no passengers, there is no physicalised cargo or other items to go flying around inside your ship... but CIG do plan to model this anything not secured in your ship will react to changes in velocity. If you've left the computer flying the ship while you go watch a screen in the mess hall you'd better hope that IFCS computer is sophisticated enough not to kill you while you're sucking on a burrito. Is there zero gravity aboard ships in Flight of Nova? You don't know, because you can't leave the cockpit, whereas there definitely will be gravity generation and zero gravity (microgravity) in Star Citizen.

I'm sure Blackmaze knows about gravity and effects, and has a basic grasp of orbital mechanics perhaps, however the extension from what he knows to what he can surmise with critical thinking skills about the differences in one game and the other may need a little longer to sink in. Star Citizen is different, with respect, the simple model this lone designer has come up with looks more accurate precisely because his game doesn't have the complexity of Star Citizen. People think the flight model and physics isn't accurate when actually it's main issue (for some players) is that it's TOO accurate, they have to have a 29th Century IFCS to cope with it. My feeling is that there should be older ships in the game without such a sophisticated IFCS so that players who want to play a Flight of Nova, KSP type game can - and those that don't can stick with the 29th Century IFCS equipped ships. We also need, and will get, custom settings we can save for ship configurations - which could become a part of the information trading. you go to a star system and buy the custom settings for each planetary body for the type of ship you're flying.

We are very fortunate to have someone of Tony Zurovec's vision and experience. If Tony has a weak point I'd say that it is that he doesn't take into account, or doesn't have the time to take into account, that not everyone might be fully up to speed with all the output from Cloud Imperium.

To understand what Tony is talking about when he talks of his plans regarding creating this 'Living Breathing Universe' you have to remember how the game is placed on the game servers. There are rules which we have to remember because they are unavoidable and unbreakable.

These are the rules:
Virtual NPC's and Instantiated NPC's can only 'live' in server RAM on the Live Game servers - without which they would simply 'stop' as static data on a hard drive (as they do now), you wouldn't see them in the game if they aren't loaded into Dedicated Game Server - Random Access Memory. No record of them could be sent to the persistence database.

Quanta live their 'lives' in the RAM of the servers running the Quantum simulation because not all the games locations will be loaded into RAM on Live DGS servers all the time.

The theory:
Both the Live Game and Quantum simulation are updated via the persistence database. When a Quanta's location in the game universe is placed on a Live Game server, in a place where either a player or NPC would expect to see them, they are logged out of the Quantum simulation and in to the Live game and loaded into RAM.

When that location where the NPC is in the Live Game is removed from a server the NPC is logged back into the Quantum simulation to carry on it's life, all the information about that NPC was sent to the persistence databases and when that NPC goes back to the Quantum simulation the information from the persistence database is used to update that NPC on the Quantum simulation.

In practise:
There is a pirate base called Spider - one of the perks of subscribing was to name and give a back-story to a pirate character on Spider, but that ceased a while ago because there were so many who qualified to do it.

If no player is near Spider then Spider is not loaded onto any game server, there is nowhere for them to put NPC's either 'real' or virtual there are no probability volumes for them to encounter. That is what the Quantum simulation is for. If a player is near Spider but not in a place where they could see NPC's, ie Spider is loaded onto a Live Game server - then it is populated by virtual NPC's which came from the Quantum simulation, they interact with the Live Game systems like probability volumes, shops and ATC. Once the player is somewhere they can see an NPC that virtual NPC is instantiated, they are now 'real'. When the player leaves so that he no longers sees any NPC's, the instantiated NPC's go back to being virtual NPC's, and if the server with Spider on it spins down, the NPC's go back to the part of the Quantum simulation where Spider is - to continue their lives until the next time a Live Game server spins up with Spider on it.


Laying it out:

There are the Quanta which are AI entities that exist in a virtual simulation real time copy of the Live Game universe. They have their names and back-story, they have personality traits, faction affiliations and goals. They have a history log of all the things they have done and places they've been... basically they live out a life in a virtual copy of the game universe that runs in parallel with the Live Game universe.

Then there are virtual NPC's, they only exist in the Live Game universe but they aren't physicalised unless a player is in their vicinity to encounter them. You'll see them show up on long range scanners for example, they do all the same things the Quanta do except now they are in the Live Game on a spun up server's RAM.

Instantiated NPC's are those you can see and physically react to or interact with, again they have all the same traits as Quanta and virtual NPC's but they also have an appearance (DNA somewhat randomly chosen just like in the character creator), dress style and where appropriate a vehicle etc.

The key thing to remember is that Quanta can become virtual NPC's in the Live Game, and virtual NPC's can become instantiated as 'real' NPC's, then back again through the same process in reverse back to Quanta. They still retain all the information, personal belongings and history log because of the persistence database.

If you remember TZ talks about a Quanta character (Draygon?) who is spawned into the game as a virtual NPC when a virtual NPC is in a place to encounter him. As a virtual NPC he goes to the space station bar where he would be instantiated if a player was there to see him, he then leaves the bar and goes back to being a virtual NPC (if he was instantiated) and then he's sent back to being a Quanta running on the Quantum simulation. If you take the bounty on Draygon, then when you are in a location where you could possibly encounter him (ie that location exists on a Live DGS server) then Draygon is brought back from the Quantum simulation to the Live game.

If you are in a location (ie a Live DGS server has spun up that location) where you would meet an Quanta NPC character again it will be the same character.. and they will remember you... because that Quantum simulation is a real time virtual copy of the real game universe taking it's information from the real time persistence database. You could call it a shadow universe which is much cheaper to run millions of NPC's on because they aren't physicalised, there are no game assets taking up RAM in that simulation, and they don't use the live game facilities like ATC.

If NPC's were created 'as required' and then burned, there would be no need for the Quantum simulation at all.

If there was no such thing as Server Meshing, ie all the game locations were running on Live servers all the time then there would be no need for a Quantum simulation, which is why there is no more information to be had about the Quantum simulation until Server Meshing goes into the game. We've been told what it is, what it does and why it needs to be there.

The Quantum simulation provides population persistence of 'permanent characters' without the overhead of placing them in the game permanently because once they are streamed out of DGS RAM and off the hard drive when a server spins down, they would be gone (paused) without the persistence database. None of the NPC's lives are paused or deleted just because there are no players around to see them or simply because no server has spun up with their location on it. They are all living their eventful lives in the RAM of the servers running the Quantum simulation until they are called back to the Live Game environment.

I've read people saying that other games have populations of 'good' NPC's, but I don't know of any game where they would run a virtual parallel simulation of that game in real time just so that the players could encounter an endless number of ever evolving NPC's with whom they can have a permanent history any time they encounter them.

I'm not a fanboy of anyone, but to me the Quantum simulation is an almost genius solution to the problems that spinning up and spinning down game servers brings to the 'life' of the characters the players would encounter in this Living Breathing Universe. For that we should thank the team involved in giving it to us. So yeah, let's see him, and them, on an SC Live.

As the person above said its currently disabled.. because if your friend logs in when you haven't, or you haven't spawned your Carrack then they wouldn't be able to get into your ship when they log in, also you logging out while you have a passenger aboard would leave them lost in space.

As the OP poisoned the well - don't talk to me about Alpha - well the fact is that it IS still in Alpha.

They aren't running a finished game, they are testing a work in progress so they must do what they need to, to do those tests. They have varied player numbers (they went from 50 to 100 then briefly 130 then back to 100), and they didn't choose to reduce player numbers despite the difficulties the current live build has, of which they are well aware - that should tell you something.

Presumably, bearing in mind they are making choices, they know that reducing player numbers would either:

Not make a heap of difference anyway (which is what they've actually said), so presumably their tests are showing that the current 3.18 issue isn't related to player load.

or

They want the servers to run close to or even beyond capacity because that is what gives them the best data for testing purposes.

Everyone is talking about what Cloud Imperium should do from their own individual player experience viewpoint, but that isn't the point.. what's best for the game's development is the point.

The intrinsic point the OP seems to be making is - CI bad and even cruel, they just want us to suffer despite CI being capable of reducing player numbers - does he really think the idea hasn't occurred to them? Those who think that aren't really concerned about the long term development of the game, they only care about how they feel today.

I'm fairly sure these clever guys could 'real time' throttle the number of players entering a DGS shard dependent upon how that server is running, but they don't do that and haven't even suggested it as a solution, that again tells us something. To those with a negative view it says one thing, to those who know what they are trying to achieve in the long run, it says another thing.

Yes, I do know that.. it's the reason for server meshing. So bearing in mind SM takes away that problem then player numbers per server are not affected by that problem.

There's no point in reducing player numbers in the current build because stress testing and observing player behaviours IS the aim of the current builds.

I'm only saying what the developers have said when asked about the increase in player count. Specifically Benoit Bausejour.

Also you're forgetting how Server Side Object Container Steaming works, and this was explained by Chris himself. When players group together in one small area this is the best case scenario from the point of view of server performance because only the area the players are in is streamed into RAM on the server. The worse case scenario is when players spread out all over the Stanton system because now the DGS has to stream all assets for those areas into RAM, and run all the logic for those areas - NPC's etc, transports etc.

So you see it's not that the players are a particularly heavy load, its that more players are more likely to spread out around the Stanton system, in terms of server load one player can bring a whole planet into server RAM. This is the reason for Server Meshing.

The players are only a small fraction of the server load, players have a greater effect on the backend services - that's what the problem with 3.18.0 was - and it doesn't matter how many servers the players are on, they are still the same number of players stressing the backend services.

The servers running at max capacity allows them to see where they can make improvements to performance now, so that when server meshing comes they have an idea of how to still make most efficient use of game servers even though those servers have a significantly reduced workload because they aren't loading the whole of the Stanton system onto one server.They are still building and testing the game, there's not much point in taking the easy route when the thing they want to test is how the game mechanics run under load.

So, no reducing player counts wouldn't help them achieve what they want to achieve, and wouldn't even improve the players experience much either. They did run 3.17.X at 130 players per server, it didn't affect performance worth noticing.

If all you want to do is sight-see then the PTU is perfect for you, the EPTU is smooth as butter. If renaming your Live folder to EPTU is too much bother then it's a valid thing to as: is a game in alpha really your cup of tea?

You bumped into the ship because you didn't position yourself in the entrance of the ship properly. Your automatic EVA systems try to re-orientate you to the local grid of the ship, the thing is that re-orientation is crude, it orientates to the 0,0,0 coordinates of the grid and you don't realise you are spun 358 degrees to the ships grid so you think you're relatively upright with respect to the floor, your EVA system says no you need to spin 358 degrees left to get to 0.0.0 orientation - which of course you try to fight because you weren't expecting it to do that. The way to avoid it happening is to pause just as you enter the ship and let the auto system orientate you before proceeding.

There is a new EVA system coming, it was discussed by Chris at the last Digital CitizenCon. It is being tested in Squadron 42 first.

You should watch the last ISC where they discussed server meshing with Benoit Bausejour.

There is no replication of player owned objects across shards, they have said that in the case of player built bases / houses they will replicate them across shards but they would be locked (no-one can enter or use them) on all shards the player isn't on.

There is the concept of stowed and un-stowed. Anything stowed is player account bound, it goes where you go, anything in your inventory, on your ship or in your own hab / hangar is stowed. Anything un-stowed after you leave the game or a shard can be taken by another player, which they can keep if they stow it in their account.

When you log into a shard they will try to put you on the shard you last went on, if you go to another shard any items you own will move with you to the new shard... off the other shard you were on when there is no-one there to see it happen if it is un-stowed, if there is someone there to see it happen then it remains on that shard until no-one is around. Any un-stowed items (things you leave around the place) will stay on the shard where you left them, they won't go to any other shard. If you left a ship on a shard and move to another shard and there are players around to see it you'll have to do an insurance claim for that ship. If you left anything else on another shard un-stowed - you've lost it until they devise a way to insure player owned gear.

Again, there is no replication of player owned items across shards. Anything you leave un-stowed belongs to the game universe now, it no longer belongs to you.

Everything is physicalised including bullets in the gun. The bullet moves from the magazine, down the barrel and toward the target affected by atmospheric density, gravity and wind, you can have bullet jam. You will be able to look in a different direction than the aim point of a weapon because the weapon aim point is not tied to your current view, unlike other FPS games. When you look down a sight your eye and head move to the gun sight. We will have magazine bullet stripping and refilling 'by hand' as well as manual scope sighting.

The current NPC population are the fixed NPC's, ie they have roles specific to where they are - they are handled by something called the NPC scheduler. They still have 24 hour lives, they can go off duty, sleep, go eat, go to bars, go shopping, go sight-seeing, go on holiday etc. They will have unique back stories, personalities and appearance eventually. The uses something called DNA to randomly create millions of unique looking NPC's. It's the same tech we get to use in character creation.

In the future there will be a dynamic group of NPC's (far more of them) that can roam around the game universe at will just like players do. They will have unique appearances (all different), unique personalities, allegiances and back stories, preferences and goals to achieve, they will react to events in the game universe dynamically. These are called Quanta. Some will have their own ships but there is also regularly scheduled public transport anyone can use.

The game universe will have a calendar of events, like the Murray Cup Racing Championship for example, Invictus Launch Week and the Intergalactic Aerospace Expo - but there are more coming, there will be politics and elections. There will be factions both political and lawless.

The Spectrum in the game is like the internet in the real world, you'll be able to do anything on Spectrum you can do on the internet. Watch sports going on in the verse, online shopping, video calling, TV shows like Galactic Gear and Whitley's Guides, and the news such as Empire Report (You'll see the Spectrum first in Squadron 42). Players will also be able to stream in-game video onto the Spectrum where they can roleplay news reporters with ships like the Reliant MAKO News Van. There will be natural disasters, pandemics, boom and bust economics, gold rushes, faction fighting and wars.

Squadron 42 takes place in the same game universe as Star Citizen except it is in the recent past. The character you create in Squadron 42 can retire to the PU (as ex-military) with all the reputation, history log and assets / achievements you gained in SQ42 going with you to the PU. Some of the same characters, or those related to those characters will also be in the PU and they will recognise / know you. Your military training and experience will unlock missions, equipment and vehicles and places in the PU closed to non-military. *Lore - not law.

There are 3 tiers of social status in the UEE, in the game universe:

Those with no legal status in the UEE, from non-aligned star systems. There is also slavery and indentured servitude outside of the UEE.

Civilians - pay more taxes, can only vote in local elections, are not allowed to own businesses that are strategic to the UEE.

Citizens - pay less tax, can stand as candidates in UEE Senatorial elections, can vote in all elections, can own production nodes (factories) and businesses essential to the UEE. Citizenship has to be earned either by service to the UEE (Joining the military in Squadron 42 for example), or you can do work for UEE agencies like the Advocacy, or you can buy citizenship - but it's expensive. No-one can gain ex-military status in the PU except by starting Squadron 42.

The Persistent universe is going to be a living breathing universe where everything dynamically changes over time with things going on all the time. No one player will ever be able to see it all. It is planned that there will be apps that connect into the game so that you can do things, and watch things in the game while not logged in to play, on mobiles for example.

With Nanite you still have to create the 3D meshes before you can convert them, which means developer time. Someone has to create those in-game assets. They have been using photogrammetry to cut down on 3D modelling time in 3D editors, but that only works for static objects like landscape items or background non-interactable items - any object that 'does stuff' cannot be made with photogrammetry (or laser scanning) alone it has to be produced by hand by 3D artist developers.

The procedural tech developed by CIG uses 3D mesh building blocks with all the 'does stuff' (doors, lights, switches, panels, display screens etc) included with each module to create larger in-game assets. Someone still has to create those 3D meshes before the procedural tools can arrange them into larger units. With the sheer volume of assets that will go into the PU it would take an inordinate amount of time and money to handcraft every single asset individually and their planet tech tools already generate landscapes, and even biomes, more efficiently than imported photogrammetry would allow.

About 3D meshes
3D models are made of vertices, edges and faces all with positions (coordinates) relative to a single point within the mesh bounding box (the X=0, Y=0, Z=0 point). The more of these the higher the number of megabytes per model which affects both download size, time to load into RAM, amount of RAM used per model and the level of apparent detail of a model. The size of a model is immaterial, a very tiny 3D model with extremely high detail is a larger file size than a very big 3D model with fewer vertices, edges and faces. The aim in game development is to use the smallest file sized models as you can. Photogrammetry generally produces very high detailed models with a file size far too big for general in-game use so those models produced by photogrammetry have to be simplified by reducing the numbers of vertices, edges and faces. 3D mesh editors can do this automagically for you.

In order to put detail back onto a simplified 3D model there are two techniques that 'fake detail' on a 3D model surface relevant to this discussion, one is called Physically Based Rendering (PBR) coupled with height maps which is what CIG uses and now of course there is also Nanite in UE5 which replaces the vertices, edges and faces on very highly detailed meshes altogether.

Nanite cannot be used on models with skeleton rigs or splines ie nothing that changes shape - like a tree branch in the wind, a field of crops swaying the wind or when touched, a flag or hair. As far as I'm aware you cannot make Nanite 'models' destructible / deformable, translucent or light emitting, whereas you can with traditional 3D meshes, in fact CIG have mentioned they intend to have deformable 3D models in the game. Nanite also has issues with 3D models that are closely stacked - which is of course what all non-terrain, non-structural Star Citizen assets are made of, closely grouped entities. PBR / height maps are applied to the (simple) 3D model faces to create 'apparent detail' on the surface, historically it had the disadvantage that any surface detail created by PBR / height maps didn't have collision physics, however CIG created a system (Thank Evo Herzeg!) so that PBR / height map generated detail does have collision physics in Star Citizen and Squadron 42.

Specifically about NMS.
Procedural generation can take place either in an external 3D mesh editor like Houdini, Maya, Sculptris, Blender etc or in the game engine. With NMS the planetary assets are procedurally generated according to a fixed formula in the game using voxels, whereas CIG uses procedural tools in the editors to produce fixed assets (the industry term for this is 'baked in' assets) which are then exported from the editor and imported into the game where they are 'hand placed' by level editors.. they do not change once exported from the editors. What CIG are doing with the tools they have developed is procedural production, not in-game procedural generation.

I almost always play at night between 1am and 6am on EU servers. I occasionally hop onto the US servers. The population density doesn't change much since CIG will spin up as many servers are needed in each region according to the number of players trying to log in. The OP's logic is flawed, they don't spin up low population density servers in any region if they can avoid it - which they can. If occasionally you find yourself on a low pop server it's either one of two reasons:

Either the server has just spun up and players are being gradually added.

or

Those already on the server are logging out... probably due to poor performance or connection issues.

It isn't cost effective to run low population servers... in any region.

They are controlled by the NPC scheduler service currently, however they require server core threads to run the AI behaviours. Those server cores run all the logic and physics for all entities in the game - typically around 100,000 or more entities. Worse, until the full Vulkan / Gen12 implementation the physics for all entities on a server run on one thread. An entity is any object or collection of objects that 'does something' in the game. A door, a train, a planet, a turret or a gun... a ship is a collection of entities and so is a fully loaded player.

Server meshing will drastically reduce the number of entities per server, and Gen12 / Vulkan will allow physics to run on any free thread.

Later we will have Quanta putting AI NPC's into the game.

I think you missed the point. 3.18.1 is going to internal load testing, 3.18.2 is going to PTU and after both those processes have completed 3.18.1 and 3.18.2 will be merged and taken to live - so there is no more 'Live' wipes planned than there was going to be.

They have stated in the past that they want players to create missions and events for other players, up to now only the racing community has stepped up, however they want it to come from emergent gameplay rather than a fixed rule set. Of course as yet we have no real idea what AI behaviours may throw up.

You can do it now in a limited fashion, with persistence you can leave breadcrumb trails with clues but obviously we don't have the range of tools as yet to make it more immersive. With placeable objects and salvaging you can engage in a bit of creative sign writing.

Going wider, for the future - yes it is planned there that will be restaurants around the verse to suit all budgets.

The Chairmans Club Handbook for example talks about a 'fine dining club and VIP events' called Epulae Dining for Chairmans Club members. It has concept art for the Murray Cup 'ring side seat' in a glass walled restaurant at Aydo on the planet Green.

There is also a kind of up-market Amazon called 'Sharrington Cross' (think Fortnum and Masons) mentioned in the Chairmans Handbook.

You can change 'decoupled mode defaults to on/off' in the options menu. If you're mostly flying with it off then make it so it defaults to off. Cruise control in space is redundant, and wasteful of fuel if all you are doing is flying POI to POI, it's only really necessary in atmosphere when you're climbing.

I agree with streamers / youtubers not using the controls most effectively. Many of them come in far too fast for landings and they don't seem to have any set routine they commit to muscle memory.

Also - VoiceAttack is not too expensive.

That's not the only reason. Do you EBay much?

Agreed it is a point overlooked by many - and because of it they have a skewed view of what is 'normal' for the game industry versus what CIG are doing. The OP is right the money raised has primarily gone toward R&D rather than simply a known product 'production line'.

Let's take an example GTA IV was the 4th iteration in a franchise that began selling in 1997. GTA V was not substantially different from GTA IV even though GTA IV had yielded revenues of over $2 Billion. That money primarily went to return on investment rather than improving the franchise (and the game industry standard for a AAA game), there was little in the way of incentive for taking a significant portion of that revenue and using it to change the paradigm or set new benchmarks. They had a proven money making formula and so GTA V has yielded almost $8 Billion since it's release - is there anyone under the illusion that DMA Design and BMG Interactive are going to be making GTA 6 a radically different gaming experience? After multiple billions in revenue and well over 18 years of work on the franchise GTA V still had a smash window mechanic to steal a car long after central locking of vehicles was a thing. Your gun still appears out of thin air and you have to have a loading screen to go inside a building.

This is what the early backers of this project knew, the suits get the money, the players get more of the same with slightly prettier graphics. If any game is produced that has 'legs' it is primarily the case that the fan base extend the life of that game via mods etc. To it's credit Bethesda has recognised this fan contribution and looking to build in that type of longevity by giving the fans more of what works. On the other hand when we consider the revenue that Bethesda has taken for Skyrim V over the years the changes they have made to the Creation Engine 2 are very small - certainly not on the scope and scale that Cloud Imperium are doing with far less money, with fewer team members in a shorter time. An average $50 Million per year is chickenfeed in the gaming industry.

I did not simply back a game - I had no clue who Chris Roberts was and didn't care, giving more than $60 - $100 for a game would have been idiotic in my view, I gave my support over the years because I wanted to help change the paradigm, to give future gamers a better choice - and we have done that as a community. We have changed the attitude of the industry, we have demonstrated what is possible when there is the collective will to do it.

A few people above have said we have no voice regarding the output - that is not the case at all, we have spoken and been listened to and that's why we are where we are instead of the 2016 version of a game Chris Roberts originally thought of. Chris' vision of the game did not have free flight down to the surface of a planet, and free roam around that planet (Chris was basically going to make a version of Starfield before Bethesda), this community were the ones asking for that and when some of the newly recruited R&D team from CryTek heard what the community wanted they set about seeing if it was possible - for the community, not Chris Roberts. So no, all communication between this community and CIG does not merely go through Chris Roberts and we are absolutely NOT bound to the agreement of investors in suits OK'ing what we can have - we speak directly to the dev teams in ways no other game development company would ever dream of facilitating. Squadron 42 is Chris Roberts game franchise, Star Citizen is this community's game. They watch us play the game and rather than ignoring us, they take what they see the community doing and expand on it. That's why we have in-PU racing tracks. No other game development company has such a close symbiotic relationship with it's player base...

..and that was the paradigm we wanted to change all those years ago. It doesn't matter when or even whether the game comes out to an official release, we have changed the paradigm! We also know that it will continue to be developed long after it's gets it's MVP release. We have a game design company that sees it's player base as partners rather than merely customers.. and if there is one point the OP missed, it's that one.. he's clearly only ever dealt with consumers of his output.

My personal view is this.. there will be games before Star Citizen and there will be games after Star Citizen, just like we used have candles and gas lamps before electricity, just like the streets used to be covered in horse shit before motorised vehicles. We will look back at games with loading screens to enter a building, or even a vehicle, or fly up to space from a planet and laugh at them the way we laugh at silent black and white movies.

Uh huh.. and the gold farmers selling aUEC, they've got no ulterior motive for wanting to keep millions of exploited coinage have they? In fact one wonders why anyone would get so uptight about a game in Alpha with expected wipes.

Methinks he doth protest too much.

How many times have the press and media told us a Carrington Event is incoming? I think I'll wait and see what the official sources have to say... acually it's very soon that the UK is going to get a national alert system for dangerous events, I believe they are testing it next month. Your phone gets an alert warning - whether you like it or not!

Why would the thing that is supposed to cause all this trouble in the first place 'bless us'? Surely it would be better if it just didn't happen at all? Or is that 'blessing' optional only for those deemed worthy?

The 3.18.1 'hot fix' is still in PTU. There has been no update for the Live build since, it's a bit of a lottery for the Live, sometimes you get in, other times not but the PTU seems a lot more stable - as yet.

There is a misconception about 'desync' in Star Citizen versus other MMO type games. Star Citizen doesn't work like other games so what appears as 'lag' to the players has a different cause in Star Citizen.

Normally in a multiplayer game the local PC game client directly controls the character and anything the character is using. Once a player initiates an action the effect of that action - the change state - is transmitted up to the server and the change states are then sent down to each player to see in their game client. This means anyone with a slow up/down link shows as game lag to other players, the player sees the result of their actions first and everyone else only sometime afterward.

That is not the way Star Citizen works and once you see why it becomes obvious when you see what happens in the game.

In Star Citizen the player doesn't directly control anything but the player avatar and vehicles. Things like elevators, door controls, loot boxes and even player attachments etc are controlled differently. You give your game client on your PC as command and instead of the client implementing it immediately that command is sent to the server. The server waits a certain period an collects all command requests from connected players within a given time frame (if that time frame is short it 'looks' instant). Once it has waited this set period of time it then sends all those commands out to the connected players so that they see things happen at close to the same time as everyone else. You see the door open on a ship at the same time any other player sees that door open.

Obviously if a server is struggling with a low tick rate the delay between received commands and distributed command results can get longer, and that's why everything seems slow to respond - it can get so slow that players assume it isn't responding at all when if you're prepared to wait, and wait, eventually you might see it respond. Not all player commands require you to input a control, standing in front of an automatic door issues a command request to open that door for you, just as if you had pressed the 'open' command.

There is a time sensitive component, after a long wait the server prioritises other commands - especially if you're trying to give more and more commands in frustration, which is just making it worse - the bottlenecked network becomes even more bottlenecked. Once the server has reached the point it can't respond anymore people start talking about 30K incoming! But there is no 'incoming' for server crash, it either has crashed in which case your game client simply stops implementing commands (from your point of view) until the 'I'm waiting for the server to respond' timer runs out - obviously if the server has actually crashed there won't be any response after the allotted time and so you get the 30K message.

There are times when network commands just don't get through for specific things, like inventory databases and log in hubs, these have nothing to do with the server build, game build or persistence, the line to that database has simply gone down or has become jammed because of the sheer volume of network calls.

There are very good reasons why Star Citizen doesn't work the same way other MMO's do and the system they are building is to take account of what the end goals are, not how the current Alpha plays.

We all made comments about that ISC on server meshing planning and the following day on SC Live Jared admitted that it had not accurately represented the work done, or the current state of play regarding server meshing. As he said.."That was on me".

Work has been done on all the backend systems to support server meshing, and as the page linked above described the actual implementation of meshed DGS's linked to the Replication Layer is not the particularly hard part. Getting all the ducks in a row is the bit that takes the time.

3.18 is the first implementation of the Persistence databases and it has happened, it is working, now it is just a case of bedding it in and dealing with any network issues 'at scale'. Once the build is stabilised they can progress. Log in flow is not about persistence or about meshing servers, the previous implementation of those log in flow's worked but like all new pieces added to a puzzle PES slightly changes the whole picture / balance so that some fine tuning is required. Nothing is 'broken' it just needs a little finessing to get it to work at scale.

The PTU is/was working very well, in fact my last two log in's to the 3.18.1 PTU were faster than they've been for a long time. This is why they need large volumes of players to stress test it to see where the kinks are. for those that did actually get into the game in 3.18.0 we saw that actually Persistent Entity Streaming was working well, it was everything else (log in flow, character retrieval, inventory database access, fleet management system etc) that buckled under the strain.

You are completely wrong.

A Dedicated Game Server is what the players connect to. There is one Stanton system per server. which takes about 100 players. It has to load all the assets and run all the code for that 100player instance of the game. CIG are now referring to each instance of the game as a shard (from the term used to describe a broken piece of glass) because the plan is to split each instance over several DGS's via server meshing thus reducing the individual DGS workload.

A group of DGS's is called a shard and it is one full instance of the current (now or future) game universe.

As usual making statements to support a point rather than actually knowing what is really happening.

1. By far the largest income comes from basic game package sales.
2. PTU usually has most ships available as well as around 1 million aUEC (or more) to spend... and PTU is account status limited for the majority of the time it is active, which isn't normally that much in a major patch.

1 and 2 never affected funding before. Your ciaim sounds exactly what they used to say about ship renting.. 'Oh they'll never do it because it would destroy the funding model!' They did do it, and it didn't affect the funding negatively - the funding actually rose sharply after the they introduced ship renting.

Pretty much sums it up for every other player, we're all here supporting the game because of what we hope it will become, not because of what it is now. When I began 9 years ago there was literally nothing but videos and pictures, but we saw the potential.

Some see the fact that it is still being built after 10 years is a bad thing, but big and complex takes more time to build than small and simple.

It will come one day, and there will be nothing else like it.

To be fair, all of that organisng takes place on your first entry.. after that it's how you want to arrange things yourself.

Oh come on, as if a large storage crate packed with stuff could be lifted by something handheld is 'realistic', if the handwavium works for one it works for the other. They did say on SCL they will be reassessing the potential use of it - personally I think they are just pulling our legs and looking forward to the Spectrum burn down, they've done it before. I have to say the tractor beam from can to mouth was a bit on the 'explicitly creepy' side as far as I'm concerned.

Your ships are no longer stored at your home base, they are tagged 'Deliverable' for location and where it normally says claim you click 'Deliver' and whichever spaceport or station you're at your ship(s) is delivered in 20 seconds - all of them - only 20's. Once you've had it delivered it stays where you parked it just like previously.

A welcome change for me because of the number of ships I have. Do you think it will appeal to all?

Distance is irrelevant. Speed over terrain is an indicator of how well the networking is functioning. Our guy above says that with even minimal assets at walking speed (or even galloping speed) crossing a server boundary there's lag / glitch in the game he mentions.

The number of entities is however very relevant. Each has to cross that boundary in the same state and orientation relative to whatever physics grid it is on / in, with it's attachment point intact. potentially hundreds of thousands of entity values have to cross server boundaries so fast the players don't even notice it has happened. From DGS to persistence database, to replication layer to DGS. All streamed in and out across the network. They even plan to have DGS server recovery happen so fast that if a server crashes that server can be spun up again with everything on it - and take all the entities from another server (remember the data for other planets and moons with all their contents has to be written to the server hard drive first then loaded into memory while the server is running) - and any incoming entities spawning in faster than you can notice that it happened.

Players could be going across a server / server boundary with literally hundreds of entities each, have 10 players with each item port on them filled and an open top box with 50 or so 'essentials' dumped into it on that ship and it could go into thousands of individual entities, multiply that by the number of players taking their own ship full. They plan to physicalise everything. What do you usually have in those other games? 4 or 5 pieces of armour, 3 weapons, a backpack, a shield, maybe a horse and a saddle with 'magic bag of holding' stowed inventory which doesn't need to align to any physics grid.

They plan to have foliage and vegetation affected by wind and engine exhausts. They'll bend in the wind or when an objects collide with them, that state has to be replicated across servers. Water surfaces will also be affected. They've even talked about destructible foliage - and weather, all that is an order of magnitude more difficult than simply static geometry with no collisions at a server /server boundary. Even a dragon you can ride at 5 or 6 m/s with only the things you can carry on you amounts to what? 10 or 12 entities crossing that server boundary? 10 players dragon flying in formation across that boundary all fully loaded is 120 entities... not thousands.

Faced with the possibility of what players may do in a game with no limits the game designers put in limits so that they don't have to do massive investment to overcome those limits. So they have static boundary server meshing, they think - shall we massively overhaul the network code to allow huge amounts of entity transfers per second or shall we put insurmountable hills where the boundaries are with 3 or 4 little single track roads through the boundary hills to control the rate at which players cross those boundaries. We all know what they usually do. That would be the usual solution, it's quicker and cheaper. CIG don't do quick and cheap. Some may find that annoying, why not do it the way other game designers do it and save us the wait? But the freedom it allows players is unprecedented. Comparing a Skyrim type game with static server meshing to what CIG are planning is like comparing a rubber dinghy to an ocean going cruise liner.

Your inventory in another game is stowed in a 'magic bag of holding' - it's player bound, it isn't physicalised, and they don't use Object Container Streaming.

Asking if it's possible or not in a community forum of the game company that says they are going to do it is a bit pointless. Will they do it, everyone has their own opinion but they did get 64Bit precision against the odds, spherical grid planets (there are no spherical grid rotating planets you can fly down to surface in any other game, no matter how much people believe the fakery - and even Starfield won't have that), Object Container Streaming, they did get vehicles inside ships and ships inside ships. They have got tier 1 salvaging and there is a physical interior to ships with cargo boxes visible - all before the workload of servers has been reduced by server meshing.

How long has GTA been a franchise? How many billions of dollars have they made? Yet it still has 'smash window' to steal a car long after central locking was a thing. The common way to steal cars is to drive them into trucks and drive the trucks to the chop shop - after 30+ years does GTA have you driving a car into a truck? They were so proud of their feature being able to drive a car onto a moving train they made a mission out it - in Star Citizen alpha that's routine meh.. drive a moving vehicle into another moving vehicle so what, anyone can do it. Can they? Really?

Whether you think they will or not, their intent is clear to see, they aren't taking the usual 'fake it' route - except temporarily. Persistence of a type not seen before in a game like this is, even if it needs some bug-fixing. The point is.. no-one else is even going to try to do those things, let alone at the scale CIG are planning... and that's the point, trying where others fear to tread, it's why it HAD TO BE community funded. No investor in the game industry would attempt it. If the magnitude of what they intend to achieve doesn't absolutely blow your mind then... YOU HAVEN'T UNDERSTOOD IT!

The speed at which the player / game object travels affects at least 3 things:

A. LOD's that have to be loaded (Yes, they are loaded client side for draw calls, but they have to exist on the server too otherwise you get the 'long grass' problem).

B. Object Containers have to be streamed in at a much higher rate and streamed out again the faster you move through an area they have to be matched on each server at server / server boundaries. Persistence has a big effect on this because of how many object containers are put in place by persistence, add that those object containers also have object containers and have to have varying loadouts and even wear and tear - which all comes from networked information from the persistence database. With static geometry and a maximum loadout like in medieval MMO's this workload is both far lower and more predictable. Imagine you flew across a server boundary and your cockpit seat disappears, or your doors, ship components, guns etc because that is what server meshing handles. There's no comparison to a few bit's of armour and a sword being tracked across a server / server boundary.

C. Moving from server to server places load on the network, many objects (far more than a few players / npc's with armour and a sword) crossing server / server boundaries increases that network traffic. If the network isn't fast enough it would be unplayable.

Clouds moving across servers are entities like any other game object, it is not a flat plane with clouds painted onto to it, except there's more... and it adds to that network traffic workload.

The pace of the MMO's mentioned in the same breath as previous versions of Server Meshing are not even close to the volume of tracked objects in Star Citizen, and of course those mentioning other instances are not so hot on the details, like where are those server boundaries? Are they somewhere where there is a lot of activity or far out along some dusty road away from the activity so that the number of entities and activity on those borders is minimal.

No-one is suggesting that Server Meshing hasn't been done before, it's that it hasn't been done on a project this complex - if it had, why are there other similar games with aircraft, vehicles and long range weapons using it now if it's all done and dusted and proven. This is what CIG does, they take known tech and push it far further than most would even try.

SC uses real projectiles (bullets and missiles) that travel in 3D space, they don't use calculated hit points like other games... and the distances those projectiles travel is much further.

Ships that fly at 100m/s over terrain - as opposed to walking, boats or horse riding.
Sniper rifles. tanks and ships that fire a projectile as far as 1km or more - as opposed to spears, bows and arrows or short range magical VFX.
Grids inside of grids inside of grids, all moving independently relative to each other... it's the physics!
Volumetric sky clouds instead of a skybox... imagine clouds crossing server boundaries like the players.

I could go on, but hopefully the point is seen. There's a reason so many open world games are set in the bronze age / iron age magical realms - it's just so much easier.

Have you noticed how these games are always on horseback or on foot? With pointed sticks to fire at each other or balded weapons, ie always with weapons that have no telephoto scope? Draw distances in Star Citizen are much bigger. How many of those games have you flying around in upper atmosphere? Travel over land and air is much faster in SC.

You can look at it one way and it's seems negative. On the other hand you could ask, why have they started advertising the game on social media now? They never did in the past.

There have been full released games with months of sales hype behind them that have had equally rocky starts.

I've seen a few crowds but normally it's quiet. Been telling folks for years player / player encounters will be rare away from choke points. The more POI's go in the more it dilutes the pool. The play space is massive and it's gonna get bigger.

I had a kinda bit of fun with PES. Was a Terra Mills got a 30K. Went and had a coffee, came back around 45 mins later, after 3 attempts managed to get back in and woke up at Orison hospital. ASOP terminal said the Corsair was still at Terra Mils, it had some loot in it so I thought I'd go check if it was still there. Took my C8. Sure enough there was the Corsair just where I'd left it with the back ramp open. Loaded a few things into the C8, flew out of the armistice a way. Blew it up to get the cargo crate. Went back with the Corsair and picked it up.

After several tries I managed to get in. Flew from Orison to PO, there were literally dozens of ships there.

Went to Cellin in my Corsair, to a certain farm and there was around 12 ships duking it out. Normally I'd just leave but I decided to go down anyway. Got shot at a bit, dodged a missile of two. Landed, ran out and watched them fighting all around me for a second or two. Went inside checked the loot boxes - infinite loot loading - went back out to my ship and took off with 'Torque Imbalance" glaring at me. Dodged a few more missiles and went to PO to repair. Never fired a shot.

If they are putting 10 or 12 AI around such a small landing spot that's er... interesting. Every time I say that I get away from players attacking me I'm told.. nah mate must've been AI. Yeah OK, I've only been playing since 2015.

Do you have a source for the 64bit precision claim for UE5 I know it was announced as 'Double Precision - Large Open World' maps briefly on their official website as an update but then it was taken off again. It's not in the Engine yet afaik. Some forumites are answering in the positive that it is, but again linking to the now deleted / removed section of the website that had it briefly. (That entry to the UE update page was deleted 2 years ago and there is no further information on the update page regarding it since).

Either way, you'll never see vegetation at that level of detail and density on their Large Open World maps even if they do put it in... there's no consumer grade PC hardware that could handle it certainly not at the draw distances SC uses... if they did have that they would be shouting it from the rooftops not making a single vehicle drive around a few hundred metres of forest in their latest promos. I remain sceptical. AFAIK there is no large open world game being released or developed on UE5. I am happy to be educated on the matter however.

There have been communications on this topic and CIG have even stated they intend foliage to be bendable, reactive to wind, even the season (eventually) and destructible.

Also let's not forget, it's not really relevant to compare a massive open world multiplayer game with single player games set in a small locale. The maximum map size of a UE5 map at max quality settings is very small.. only "21km² (well, 20.9707km² to be exact)" example that's 4.5km x 4.5km.. absolutely miniscule compared to even Star Citizen's smallest moon and UE5 maps are not designed to be flown over at high speed. You can extend the size of the map in UE5 but it comes at a big cost to quality. No-one will be making a game with UE5 that comes even close to the massive expanses there are in Star Citizen, even with drastically lowered quality settings, it doesn't have 64bit precision.

I'm looking forward to the day when I can get my helmet professionally polished at Madame FooFoo's Helmet Polishing and Foot Massage For Weary Travellers Emporium. Those visors do get a bit claggy n scratched. Still having a dirty helmet is better than having to go around begging for one.

...so you're saying there should be nothing left for my Reclaimer - S1r Shippy McSmasher - to munch down on? Hmm.. Munching ships is what I do... they call me S1r Munch.

They have discussed this and stated it was why they have to be very careful where they put the save points in the game. You'll find on a Squadron 42 Q&A with Chris on the SC Youtube channel. Not playing SQ42 won't halt your gameplay in the PU, it's just that any 'connected' gameplay experiences won't show for you until you do. Your gameplay log has timestamps as you unlock any PU connected features in SQ42. For example they said that gaining the F8C Lightning comes toward the end of Episode One and so if that achievement isn't yet on your characters history it won't unlock in the PU, but once you reach it - it will.

To be clear, you don't have to buy SQ42 again to replay the combat sections with your character, you only need a new character slot when begin with a new character which is also a new character available to transfer to the PU and Episode 2 and 3. Comparing to other games and how people will react to replay limitations is a bit misleading, this game is different. To be honest Chris wants it to feel more like you are involved in an interactive movie where you play a character part. If there weren't a series in the franchise perhaps some would decry not being able to endlessly replay new characters but the whole point of Squadron 42 is that you play your own hero through the whole saga. You don't get to replay a new character in Halo or COD the price of creating your own character and continuing it - has a price there are no do-overs in real life, no-one has issues with that. It's highly likely there will be other saga's set in the same game universe, it doesn't have to be only navy pilots. The next one could be Star Medic.

Comparing to other games and how people will react to replay limitations is a bit misleading, this game is different. To be honest Chris has said wants it to feel more like you are involved in an interactive movie where you play a characters part. If there is a series in the franchise (as is planned) perhaps some would decry not being able to endlessly replay new characters but the whole point of Squadron 42 is that you play your own hero through the whole saga. Any SC / SQ42 or beyond game can take the player character from any other game, how many games do that? Normally in the few instances where a character arc continues, like Halo or Mass Effect you are told your name before the start, you don't pick it yourself and you certainly don't take those into a wider sandbox multiplayer to continue their personal story until death. When doing roleplay games most skip through the story elements anyway to get to the action, it'll be the same in Squadron 42, you just replay the action parts. It's no different to Skyrim, you can't endlessly change you characters story without removing the old, if you go back in time to change your mind with a replay, you miss the future bits you already did, you either do them again or do something different so that in the end the character has only one story. It's highly likely there will be other saga's set in the same game universe, it doesn't have to be only navy pilots. The next one could be Star Medic.

If new character slots are as cheap or cheaper than ship paints I doubt anyone will complain, you get to live a very long storied life for each character you create across multiple games.

I agree, in my opinion they are too draconian in their attitude to spoilers, specifically Todd Howard can stand on a stage and tell everyone you'll be able to visit 100 star systems and 4 fully built cities in Starfield - it gives us an idea of the scope of the game but it doesn't give away one iota of the story / gameplay. There is no reason in my mind why Chris can't give details like that yet we know already some of the story elements like locations events and factions, and we know we'll have titan suits and fight alien animals. These details seem much more like 'spoilers' than anything related to metrics and scope. We know there are 30 main missions with side branches for example.

We can hazard guesses from what has been revealed, the first trailer saw Capt White talking to our character saying "I see you applied to flight academy again" - The naval flight academy is in the Kilian system. We know Old Man Colton talks to us like a rookie pilot in the vertical slice, and we know they made a cartoonified - 'Go join up' video for the very first Invictus Launch Week.

We know the Vanduul attack triggers the war and that attack is in the Vega system, there have been 3 videos of Squadron 42 featuring the Vega system.

The Speech by Admiral Bishop takes place in the Senate on Earth and while it isn't a slam dunk on that basis we do know that one of the very earliest stretch goals was for a 4th landing zone on Earth as well as New York, Moscow and Shanghai.

..and of course the Odin system

We also know (from the vertical slice mission and what they have said) there are no time jumps in the game, you can pause the time but you can't go back in time except to the nearest last save point, in order to go from system to system you have to go through intervening systems... taking all the above into account on that basis it suggests there is likely to be at least 12 star systems in Squadron 42. Terra and Magnus being two which they have said in their communications are also likely candidates for PU. Example when asked 'which systems are coming after Stanton Todd Papy said it could be one of four, Terra, Magnus, Pyro or Nyx - well now know we of course it's Pyro. This also fits because we know the next two systems planned for the PU are Pyro and Nyx - which are the systems that connect Stanton to Odin, and the rest of the other possible / probable star systems in Squadron 42 E1.

So you rule out the possibility that the majority want both to suit your argument? Because that is how you feel about it?

They used to talk about these things back in the past, some I got from talking to them in person. There is an interview with Chris called Squadron 42 Q&A from around 2018 on the Star Citizen Youtube channel.

Well frankly this statement is completely disingenuous because it ignores the known facts.

1. Until February of 2016 there was no choice but to buy both Squadron 42 and Star Citizen at the same time, they were not offered as separate packages until 14th February 2016.

2. Squadron 42 is a one-off payment, given that it comes heavily discounted if you buy a Star Citizen package it's likely the majority still choose to buy both, even after the package split.

What few are aware of is the very good reason to buy more than one Squadron 42 game package, because you aren't just buying a game, you're buying the right to create a unique character in the whole Squadron 42 / Star citizen universe, that character progresses through episode 1, 2 and 3 and then to the PU. You will not be able to create more than one character for each Squadron 42 purchase. When you buy a Star Citizen package you only get one character, whether it comes from Squadron 42 or not. Why do people think Squadron 42 would be any different? Probably because people can't stop thinking of Squadron 42 as 'any other typical AAA game'... which it isn't.

You can replay Squadron 42 with the same character, but only the combat sections in the military simulator - Arena Commander - where you can improve your combat scores. (Chris Roberts has done this in the past with his Wing Commander games, you can't replay Wing Commander Prophecy making different choices, you have to start each character you create from the very beginning again otherwise you only (re)play the simulator). People say how will they make money from selling SQ42 alone and no ship sales, one way (they have many in consideration) is by doing something few others have tried, by monetising replays. You can't have multiple playthrough's taking different choices at each playthrough, and you will be asked to make choices, moral choices and those choices will directly affect your character in the PU afterward. Once you've made your choices for your character those choices are fixed in that characters history log and timeline, who then retires to the PU with that specific history - that's why you can't play all choices with one Squadron 42 purchase. They have discussed offering 'extra character slots' to existing owners of Squadron 42.

As others have pointed out, the only real activity that backers can see happening is with the PU, the majority do not visit these forums so we have no idea what the majority think of Squadron 42 Episode One. People spending time and regurgitating each other's echo-chamber ignorance is no proof at all.

Either way it makes no difference, the only reason people make the claim that they don't care about Squadron 42 is because they haven't done their research into the project and they don't realise that Squadron 42 takes place in exactly the same game universe. As Jared Huckaby described it "Squadron 42 is basically one huge dynamic mission in the Star Citizen universe." They are not separate games, they are intrinsically linked.

The test-bed PU we have now is a tip of the iceberg compared to the full 'Squadron 42 universe' to come - that the PU will eventually become. There's no UEE presence of substance in the current PU, we have no history logs and meaningful progression, and without all that underpins Squadron 42 there never would be.

So you missed the master mode, ladder traversal and AI behaviours? The fire propagation?

One word.. Dependencies. First Persistence needs to be finalised and then server meshing (the primary reason for server meshing isn't just so that loads of players can all play together, it's to massively decrease the workload required of each DGS, to allow that workload to be spread over many DGS's) as well as Gen12 and Vulkan. The amount of stuff that will come from Squadron 42 to the PU is humongous, there's no way the current server builds and architecture could handle it all without going to 1 tick per second or less. The current server build (one shard per server) is at it's maximum capacity with tick rates going down as low as 4 or 5 per second in some instances, in order to put more in they have to take stuff out. It's still an alpha testing environment, whatever needs testing the most gets priority. Some things don't need a multiplayer environment to test and so it is more efficient to do that in Squadron 42 Episode One.

Some things lend themselves to certain environments, multiplayer inventories, ship selection screens etc are all network dependent so they are best stress tested under heavy player load. Weapon balancing and the flight model don't need heavy player load, that kind of fine tuning can be done by the QA teams with predictable workloads. A PU server load is wholly unpredictable, they can't know in advance what the players are going to bring in, or what they are going to do whereas the Squadron 42 environment is fully predictable, they know exactly what is in each instance and they can repeat those exact same conditions over and over again.

It is a big mistake to consider the PU and Squadron 42 as two separate games, like the multiplayer for a Call of Duty type game, they aren't. They are being co-developed because they are all part of the same game universe. Those people who say they aren't interested in Squadron 42 are going to change their minds when they realise you play the same character in SQ42 as the PU if you want to, and if you don't you'll start at significant disadvantage.

Your SQ42 exploits, including things you earn and rep/history, will go with you when you retire your Squadron 42 character to the PU. How many players will be pee'd off to find that if you don't play SQ42 you don't have the right to legally own and fly the F8C Lightning in the PU? (It's the top of the line heavy fighter) ...and that's just one cross-over, who is going to refuse the chance to get an F8C in the PU for a measly extra $15? There are other front line military grade things that non-military are restricted from obtaining and using in the PU. The UEE is still a militaristic empire, if you're not military, or ex-military, you're 'little people' if you're some Joe-Schmo they can't trust they aren't going to allow you to waltz into New Deal and buy something that can threaten their superiority, not to mention you pay less tax in the PU as ex-military with automatic Citizenship status**. There will be plenty of places to go and missions to do in the PU which you'll only get by playing Squadron 42. Some of the characters you meet and deal with in SQ42 will also be in the PU, sometimes you'll hope they recognise / remember you, sometimes you'll hope they don't.

If you read some of the developer posts on Spectrum the developers drop hints, like they have ships, vehicles and equipment that are only for Squadron 42. Why are they selling Idrises and Javelins to just about anyone including letting criminal factions get hold of them? It's because they are old stock, military surplus, second tier. The UEE is using that old military stock to raise money to pay for the new stuff. They are not the 'UEEN in time of war' tip of the spear, we don't get to see those until Squadron 42 comes out and you won't find them in civilian dealerships or even in the RSI website store. They are very careful to make sure nothing that we haven't already seen shows up in any videos. So why aren't they showing more Squadron 42 stuff? That's one reason, there's only so many places where the 'old timers' get to play a part, mostly in the beginning before the real war starts.

Those folks who think they are going to have a high old time playing pirate, you should know that criminal behaviour can get your hard earned citizenship revoked by the UEE, they can even confiscate your stuff. Do you like doing the CDF or bounty-hunter missions? What do you notice about the requirements for those missions? "We're looking for people with the relevant combat experience" comes up a lot.. the only place you'll get that experience is in Squadron 42. The current PU assumes we're all retired ex-military. There is only one time we are referred to as 'civilian' in the PU and that's just as you leave the Klescher Rehabilitation Facility, after you've finished your sentence.

** There are several layers of social class in the UEE: those with no legal status at all, civilians and citizens. Citizenship has to be earned or bought - it will take a long time to earn and it is very expensive to buy. You get automatic citizenship when you join the military, which you can only do in Squadron 42, so you have to at least sign in and create a character. If you start in the PU without having a Squadron 42 character you start as a civilian with no training, no licenses (Chris has referred to these as 'badges') and no security clearances. There is no non-SQ42 way to earn or get ex-military status.

The idea that most of them are working on SQ42 exclusively and will be freed up for the PU once Episode One is done is misleading. Most of the work for SQ42 also comes to the PU in the end, obviously it won't come to the PU before SQ42 if it contains spoilers, but there are other features that are being tested first in SQ42. As far as freeing up teams, don't forget once the core game features have been built (which is both Sq42 and the PU) there is Episode Two and Three of SQ42 also, and they won't waste time getting those out since a sizeable amount of the work needed for them is already done.

Ha.. when we were rushing to spend the millions we were given for 3.17.X before they took it away again there was a queue... a big one.

We agree on virtually all except one thing. You ?? seem to think that the running simulation he is showing on the screen is Quantum, but consider this - it isn't Quantum it's his simulation of the planned Live game environment - he's just showing the effects of Quantum on it. Like all CIG dev's Tony doesn't repeat information given previously I was at the 2019 CitizenCon when that simulation was first shown they said it was their live game simulation. There is an important distinction to be made, all the information you have linked to is good, but it all refers to the live service game universe running on shards, but the live service only runs those areas the players are in, there is no subsumption, vNPC's or probability volumes running on the live service in areas where there are no players. The only place where every nook and cranny of the game universe is simulated is in the Quantum simulation.

So yes, the Quanta that is Draygan is spawned into the live simulation as a vNPC interacting with vNPC's in that live game probability volume who can be instantiated as a full NPC in that live environment, and back to a vNPC - as I said. He did say if there was a player in the bar they would see Draygan, no player can enter the Quantum simulation. Also Draygan is removed from the live game once he's done his thing but he is not put into stasis and forgotten, he goes back to the Quantum simulation.

The Quantum simulation runs in parallel with the live game persistent universe, it doesn't control the PU, they both inform each other and other backend services and simulations inform both of them, like Odin and Quasar. If there was no live service running the persistent universe goes on evolving - this is why it is called 'The Living Breathing Universe', it doesn't need players to be there for things to happen, indeed areas where players might not go don't remain static and they don't run on the live service empty of players. If all the NPC's are just one task scripted zombies with no memory they'll still be there even though the place has become a ghost town because all the resources have been mined out in the players absence.

The aim of this project, of both Chris and CIG, is to fake as little as possible, and enable as much player choice as possible... that is what makes it different.

No you may not want to know everything about every person you meet but the one's you choose could be given their attributes 'on the fly' as needed according to what level of interaction you choose with that individual. That is the system they are building, NPC's that evolve as the players interact with them, and as the game universe changes around them. It's why they keep saying ''There are no background characters in Star Citizen''.. it's because they can all evolve to become what the player wants them to become, with full persistence of memory.. not all of them... just the ones the players deem worthy of their attention. Consider the logic - how realistic would it feel to know that every drink can you put down will still be there every time you log in for weeks or months yet every NPC you interact with immediately forgets all about you the minute your back is turned.

No it isn't merely a macro simulation.. if you watched all TZ's presentations - and actually took time to study them - you'd know that.

In his last presentation he gives an example of a Quanta who is a pirate, he attacks virtual NPC's and gains a rep and bounty, he goes drinking in a space station bar where you could physically encounter him and collect that bounty... in the live game, not in a simulation.

Quantum was created to solve a problem of manpower - to create millions of unique NPC's to populate the verse it would take hundreds if not thousands of dev man hours, it is the typical approach CIG takes to problems of scale... Quantum creates those NPC's procedurally according to a formula of personality traits and even backstories and those NPC's are autonomous, they have lives and history logs just like players. They are not scripted scheduled NPC's, the are not virtual NPC's created for missions, they can free roam around the game universe at will.

The tough part people seem not to be able to wrap their heads around is that CIG aren't doing NPC's the standard way (at least not all of them). Usually NPC's are scripted for behaviours by dev's by hand. This is why there is a lot of repetition of AI NPC's in other games. Along with Quantum there are bespoke 'scheduled' NPC's these are the traditional scripted NPC's like bartenders, security staff etc. Then there are virtual NPC's created by mission logic and probability volumes.

Now here's the kicker - all types of AI NPC's have their own lives, character traits, history logs, 24 hour - 7 days a week lives. Tony explained it would be computationally to expensive to have that many NPC's 'live' as entities in the verse so Quantum simulates real individual NPC's in a virtual universe, but if any of those Quanta are in a location to affect either players, scheduled NPC's or even virtual NPC's in the live verse then those individual Quanta are spawned into the game as virtual NPC's or even fully instantiated NPC's - they can transition between each stage as required all while keeping a history of that Quantum character which is stored on a database.

There is a macro economy simulator to run on the backend, I believe it is called Odin, but it is not Quantum that only procedurally generates and runs Quanta individuals either as a simulation (a copy of the live game universe that has no physical entities) or as a resource of a population of formula driven NPC's for the live game (super boosted, on steroids, on demand headless clients). It would be more accurate, and easier to understand, to describe each Quanta as procedurally generated virtual players who when they log out of the live game go back to their virtual life in the simulator, who, just like when real players log out to the real world, are no longer tracked on the live persistence databases until they log back in to the Live game again.

I have 5 accounts, 4 of them only have 2 ships each... they all show 19004 error when trying to log in... just like the 9 year old 30+ ship account with tonnes of 'flair.

As others have explained it is the sheer volume of players showing up the issues in the backend services, it's not about game builds or server builds, its about the volume of communication between them and the backend systems.

They know what to respond to because they follow the community communications. Jared specifically mentioned why the issues with 3.18 didn't show up in the PTU and about the decision to go to a live release, which was a common theme in many posts both here and on Reddit.

Splitting hairs about listening ad responding is disingenuous, if someone doesn't respond there is no way to know if they are listening, is there?

They know what to respond to because they follow the community communications. Jared specifically mentioned why the issues with 3.18 didn't show up in the PTU and about the decision to go to a live release, which was a common theme in many posts both here and on Reddit.

Yes this is one of the strengths of this developer / community partnership, straightforward communication. There are those who say 'They don't listen'... well clearly they do. When they make a mistake or things don't go as planned they acknowledge it. This ISC was more like the old days... ''This is what we're gonna do, and this is how we're gonna do it.''

Some see intention where there is none, some pattern where here is merely random chance. Plenty of 'Whale' Youtubers are logging into 3.18.

TL:DR don't read meaning into things when there is none, it's just random.

We have a lot of new people in the last 4 or so years, this is a good thing but it has drawbacks. The 'why's' and 'wherefore's' get lost in the mists of time. It is a very complex project to follow so.. a little background for context.

Normally in a game you input a control and the command is executed client-side first then the changed state information is passed up to the servers where everyone else's game client get's updated to show the action the player has just commanded. This causes significant desync. I command door open and it opens, but other players see the door open some time after me. I command 'get out of cockpit seat', but Star Citizen has a fundamental rule, it always assumes someone else should see you get out of your seat at the exact same time you do.

To get around this the engineers fundamentally changed the way Star Citizen executes player commands. Instead of the command being executed immediately by the local game client what happens is the server waits a certain period of time while it gets all player inputs in a locality, then it sends all those player commands down to each connected game client, the theory being all players should see the results of other players inputs at 'closer to' the same time.

Where this appears to fall down from a current players perspective, IE the game appears unresponsive to commands, is when the backend network and servers are struggling. The good news is that we all see the 'stuck-ness' at the same time, the bad news is that due to network foibles and hang-ups everyone thinks the game build is broken because they don't realise Star Citizen doesn't do it the way other games do.. it isn't a game build issue.. the unresponsiveness relates directly to how the backend networking and servers are performing which has a lot to do with how many players are sending inputs in a given time frame.. it's just that players can't fathom why your last command input could take anything up to 1, 3, 5, 10 or even longer minutes to execute. They just think.. it isn't working!

The reason you get stuck in your seat sometimes is the same reason doors won't open and elevators don't come, it's a network snafu. The persistence database isn't just about coffee cups and broken ships littering up the place, the state of the game universe also includes the state of every player and every interactable item. Every time you change anything it gets sent to that database so that it has an exact snapshot of the game world universe at that point in time. This is why random actions seem to work sometimes and not others, it's because the 'change state' information lags behind what those thousands of players are doing. It gets further and further out of sync. According to recent reports, even to the point it becomes unrecoverable.

CIG knows when they have explained something in the past, they don't rehash information for those who aren't up to speed. Their reports of what is happening is comprehensible as long as you have that information, if you don't it just doesn't make sense that the non-working ASOP terminals, the stuck in your seat, the elevators don't come is all directly linked to how the network is passing information to the persistence database and then back down to each connected game client. Players can activate things just by walking up them, like doors, or terminals. It's a command just the same as when you hit a key. They simply say... The state of the game universe is drifting away from what it should be given all those slow or even missed network inputs.

It is the best solution for the unique to Star Citizen issues.. in the long run, once those server overloads and backend services are running optimally.. we just aren't there yet... But it will all come right eventually.

It's all linked to the fundamental way that persistence controls absolutely everything in the game. No-one else has even tried anything like this before. You don't directly control anything in the game, the players make requests and the persistence database makes those requests happen when it 's ready according to the timestamp of the request or the priority of the request (eg. player incapacitated gets priority over player just wants to get up from his seat), for everybody in the game universe, hopefully simultaneously.

People complain, or even scoff at what they are doing but the fact that it works at all, even some of the time, is so 'out there' radically different if it doesn't blow your mind you simply haven't understood it.

One wonders how the project ever got this far based upon that logic. We've had naysayers and detractors predicting doom and gloom since day one... Yet here we are... And here CIG are doing exactly what they said they would.

No-one ever suggested it was going to be easy, if it was easy we'd have the money-suits funding the project waiting for their big pay-off demanding it be dumbed down for an earlier release. It's precisely because none of the industry standard types wanted to know about a project like this that the community stepped up. Blah crowding, blah hard sell tactics.. if the dream wasn't worth a damn good try none of that would have worked.

I agree, they worked through the weekend and even late into the night. We were warned and we knew such a major upgrade / update to the game would probably have a rocky start but they're working through it.

The log in servers are not the AWS regional servers. The account verification phase takes place on CI's own servers. Only once the account is verified are you allowed access the DGS.

You may notice you can only select your region AFTER you have successfully logged in.

I playtested the PTU since wave 1 was opened, the current state of the Live is no surprise to me. I've been playing since the Live release on December 23rd 2015. It's always the same in the first week(s) of a major pillar tech patch.

The whole point of having players playtest is so that when the final release happens we don't get the usual 'Day 1' of a final release like other games. It's ironic hearing people saying they are going back to ED: Odyssey, have they forgotten what a shit-show the first week of Odyssey was? ...and it didn't even include any new tech.

Yeah, if you can't handle being part of testing an Alpha project you should definitely move on. Good advice.

We can agree on that. The end goal is to fund the project, they are aware how people use what works for their particular circumstance to assist with that in whatever way they choose.

There was an old woman who swallowed a fly
I don't know why she swallowed a fly - perhaps she'll die!


There was an old woman who swallowed a spider,
That wriggled and wiggled and tiggled inside her;
She swallowed the spider to catch the fly;
I don't know why she swallowed a fly - Perhaps she'll die!


There was an old woman who swallowed a bird;
How absurd to swallow a bird.
She swallowed the bird to catch the spider,
She swallowed the spider to catch the fly;
I don't know why she swallowed a fly - Perhaps she'll die!


There was an old woman who swallowed a cat;
Fancy that to swallow a cat!
She swallowed the cat to catch the bird,
She swallowed the bird to catch the spider,
She swallowed the spider to catch the fly;
I don't know why she swallowed a fly - Perhaps she'll die!


There was an old woman that swallowed a dog;
What a hog, to swallow a dog;
She swallowed the dog to catch the cat,
She swallowed the cat to catch the bird,
She swallowed the bird to catch the spider,
She swallowed the spider to catch the fly;
I don't know why she swallowed a fly - Perhaps she'll die!


There was an old woman who swallowed a cow,
I don't know how she swallowed a cow;
She swallowed the cow to catch the dog,
She swallowed the dog to catch the cat,
She swallowed the cat to catch the bird,
She swallowed the bird to catch the spider,
She swallowed the spider to catch the fly;
I don't know why she swallowed a fly - Perhaps she'll die!


There was an old lady who swallowed a horse...
She's dead now, of course!

She could have just waited a day to let the fly die of natural causes! Simplest is generally the best. Patience has it's own rewards.

You think they aren't aware of CCU chains being used to gain discounts? But they did it anyway. If it was just about selling Hurricanes they could have just offered a discounted Hurricane standalone.

Unfortunately the extra work required to do it becomes moot after they fix the log in issues for the Live service. It's easier to fix those issues than have a whole new separate log in flow.

People assume that since they can't log in it must be terminally broken for everyone, but it isn't, some are able to log in.

We had this same issue on day 2 of wave 1 PTU, they fixed it within 24 hours. This is the reason for testing at scale, everyone trying to log in at once, multiple times, is the stress test that was expected and we were warned about.

Major patch day 1 is always like this, it's no different to full game releases.

If they didn't what was the point of pre-warning about the price increase AND offering the 'one off, no special event' CCU sale - they had never done it that way before.

Also, there is a 'cheap' Antares CCU for a chain.

It's not a bad idea, and indeed there was a time when the 'only game' was Arena Commander. The problem is that the long term plan for AC is that it is an in-lore in-game simulator both for recreation and military training. There aren't separate log in servers for it, because it was never going to be separate from the game universe.

You may remember the plan was for Thursday release. Unfortunately this project isn't some piddly single-item product launch, it's a little more complex than that. If you paid attention more you might know that.

Gaming awards aren't given to games in development, only released games.

It's seems you really do struggle to understand that this project relies on community support and funding and that it isn't anywhere near a finished state.. this is odd because the warnings and caveats concerning this are all over the place.

This community wanted a game developer to try something different, we didn't want more of the same 'money men' corporate approach, it was always supposed to be a consultative process, a partnership even.

Like many you don't seem to understand the scale of what this partnership is attempting, there's no point in comparing it to anything else, there is nothing like it. If it were like other games, you wouldn't be here talking about it because 'normal game development' doesn't involve keeping the players informed.

The Retaliator Bomber and the Gladius are both Squadron 42 ships, so is the F7A, Starfarer and the Aurora.

They did say the issue with the Hull C, it's the animated extendable walkway that is giving them issues. Add to that the cargo refactor and the fact that the C, D, E capacity is far too large for a single system Alpha, Pyro should change that.

We get to play a limited alpha testbed. You make the mistake that many before have made in thinking this a released game feature complete awaiting additional content. It isn't, not even close.

You also assume that what is in the current alpha release is all there is, all that has been done, it isn't. Some features can't go in until server meshing improves server performance, the servers are at their limits with the current build.

The foundations absolutely do include PES and server meshing, without those we don't have the game that was intended.

You need to do a lot more catching up before handing out advice to the company that has broken all records in the last 10 years.

These were all the same issues we had in the PTU, this is what the wide stress test is for. It'll be fixed soon. Day 1 of a new patch is always a bugfest

That would be long term crewing limits for a lone HH without re-supply. If a team had their own ship they arrived in, their suits can last up to an hour while they repair and protect. When the full life support systems come online I expect we'll get the ability to tank off from portable supplies too as well as replenish ship supplies. Won...

There you should be some house-keeping for a planned extended absence just like in real life, you would empty the the refrigerator, freezer and turn off the mains water supply if you knew you were leaving your home unoccupied for an extended period.

We will also have the option to share owned assets with other players, so it becomes about who you trust.

Windows update messes with folder permissions if they are within the protected OS environment 'C:/Programs Files' is (it can change them to 'Read only'). It is best to install both the Launcher and the game files into a folder on the root of whatever drive you are using. EG C:/RSI/ or D:/RSI/

In order to do a 'Verify' check (which it does automatically at install) the RSI Launcher has a directory scanner, Windows Defender sees this as suspicious behavior if it is within the protected OS environment, if the directory scan doesn't succeed it will throw an error.

3.18 PTU - The game is freezing up regularly, played for several hours on both todays patches. Random, happens anywhere.

Going around playing burglar bill, looting free stuff then distributing around the space stations. I like to give stuff away to other players too, I have so much free gear on my accounts when I sign in, which I don't use, it's gonna get replaced with the next wipe anyway... so mostly sight-seeing.

AMD Drivers aren't Cloud Imperium's responsibility, this is an AMD issue, if it weren't then why are there sites where other drivers are offered to solve issues?

That's not how it works. Servers aren't spun up to accommodate game spaces on a shard, they are spun up to accommodate players in the game spaces. Even if there are 10 star systems, no servers would be spun up for any space not occupied by players.

To be fair, once we pulled them on it Jared did admit that they had failed in accurately communicating with the community regarding the progress of server meshing. I personally feel it was a faux pas of such magnitude that they should have brought forward the planned 'part 2'. Those planning meetings took place in January.

To be fair, once we pulled them on it Jared did admit that they had failed in accurately communicating with the community regarding the progress of server meshing. I personally feel it was a faux pas of such magnitude that they should have brought forward the planned 'part 2'. Those planning meetings took place in January.

There is no reason beyond prettier visuals. That was what Reshade was made for. I use Reshade in other games, not for any advantage, just to make it look nicer.

Yes long load in times, the first log in while shaders are compiled can take upwards of 15 minutes, you just have to wait it out. Once shaders are compiled the game will load faster afterward. Sometimes you get a timeout or disconnect while loading, just keep trying.

I agree that players should be more defensively aware, and that's a skill they should learn. There are other tactics too. The rest - we won't know because we don't have all the defensive features in yet.

You think a Prospector is some sort of sitting duck and your answer to their 'boring existence' is to up-gun them - but not too much - instead of giving them better shields, armour, faster engines, better stealth or better long range radar?

It includes all the teams for planetside missions and content. If it were for the Stanton system then keeping it unannounced seems a bit pointless. It's likely to be something for Pyro.

There has been a noticeable 'surge' in RAM use in the latest 2 builds for 3.18. Anyone with less than 8GB VRAM and 32GB RAM is going to struggle, this has unexpected effects since some of the collision physics is done from figures (heightmap values) sent from the GPU to the CPU. My GTX1080Ti is now maxed out (11GB VRAM) while my Ryzen 9 3900X is running at 15%, not really surprised by that, I knew the day would come when the GTX 1080Ti would struggle but hopefully Gen12 optimisations and Vulkan may improve performance. I plan to upgrade to the RX 6800 XT in the near future.

Game Settings:
Medium scattered object draw distance
Medium clouds
Chromatic Aberration off
Motion blur off
Film Grain Off
FOV 100
VSync set to 'Fast' in NVidia Control Panel - off in the game.
FOIP off
2560x1440p Fullscreen
All other settings at max.


My crash log shows out of memory issue even though there was more free, there was an 8mb file that fails to load into memory in the patch before last mentioned in the crash log. It's definitely improved in the last build which seems to be more about log in issues and 30K's. There is frequent stuttering in the latest build, but the GPU is showing 98 - 99% use in cities and QT.

Windows Resource Monitor is showing 79% GPU usage while in the game loading screen. (Loading into ArcCorp Area 18). The first log in after a patch update / shader cache deletion is taking about 15 minutes to compile shaders (I really wish they would change that loading screen I'm so fed up of the dark clouds with E.T riding the Neverending Story Dragon pareidolia!), subsequent game loads are faster between 3 and 5 minutes from menu screen to sitting up.

All 3.18 patches up to now after a 30K are taking me to the character creation screen at re-log in but fails to connect to the service, leaving that screen let's you log into the game and my character is the one I've previously made. It's a nuisance but doesn't stop me getting into the game. Other than that the 3.18 patch seems to be on a par with the current Live build as far as I can see. The 'Move All' function in the inventory is working well and the inventories are fast and responsive. QT did throw me into a planet once a couple of days ago. I made a report and post in the forum about an issue with the Graphics Options menu - menu's weren't working properly to select screen resolution and window mode preferences - they fixed it within 12 hours of the report and post.

GTX1080Ti 11GB VRAM
32GB DDR 4 RAM @3200 Mhz
Ryzen 9 3900X (12C/24T)
NVMe drive for OS and game.
X570 Motherboard.
RSI Launcher and game files installed to a folder on the root of the OS Drive 'C'.
Pagefile set to 32GB on NVMe drive. Windows 10 Professional.
Shader Cache set to 10GB in NVidia Control Panel.
5G mobile internet via USB tethering.

No. They did say PES might actually make performance worse than the 3.17 branch (which is a continuation of the 3.16 branch) initially. Some people are reporting better performance locally with the Gen12 Renderer.

Unless that basin has salt water in it I think that Chelonian had better be a Terrapin... er..wait, it's not a microwave is it?

Turtle = Sea Water - Terrapin = Fresh Water - Tortoise = No water.

Some fun facts:
All Chelonians can store fresh water in what was their bouyancy bladder. Sailors used to use them for food and fresh water supply on long voyages. The giant tortoise wasn't named by scientists for so long because they were too delicious. No specimens ever made it back to Europe without being eaten on the voyage. Including by Charles Darwin.

I mentioned a bug with a PTU patch before last and it was fixed within 12 hours. It was an issue with the Options Menu items for Graphics Settings.

I think you keep missing my point, that may be my failure. I know Server Meshing has been actively worked on for years, I know what server authority means, I know what the Atlas Service is.. the problem is that the ISC doesn't present it that way. People were expecting information about progress and how they intend to make it all work Soon™, you know maybe using a few of those Progress Tracker buzzwords you feel are important in the discussion!

The failure as far as I'm concerned isn't the dev team doing the actual work it's the Community Content Team's failure to be accurate and control the messaging to it's target audience that is what understandably confuses people, anyone who knows this project, this community and it's relationship with the development team could have predicted that it would go down like a lead balloon, not because of any major announcement or changes, but just because of the way it was presented. It was a totally avoidable (mixing my metaphors here) own goal while simultaneously shooting themselves in the foot perched on top of a failure to read the room and learn from their previous mistakes, they snatched defeat from the jaws of victory, from the penalty box, before any whistle had even been blown! There was no-one else on the pitch and they still lost! Slavishly sticking to a format that doesn't lend itself to giving out much anticipated detail. The experiment might be better to ditch the rigid schedule in favour of clear and concise messaging.

There's no-one who has ever read a Letter from the Chairman who doesn't know that Cloud Imperium aren't exactly big on controlling the messaging to avoid unnecessary drama, mostly we tend to forgive it because it's quaint and relatable, but occasionally it actively works against the efforts of the community to present the project and the game in a light that draws in more players and supporters, we are at a key moment in the history of the project... we didn't need this unnecessary stink-bomb attracting unwanted attention especially when they could have just listed what has been achieved or what is planned work to date. It's my contention that those interested would have been quite happy with that.

Jared wants feedback on his 'experiment' - well he's getting it! I humbly suggest the subject of a core tech pillar so essential to the project wasn't a suitable place or time to experiment. in my view it should have gone out complete as a full CitizenCon type presentation, treating as some sort of hey by the way "..part 2 in a few weeks!" does misread the level of the community's interest and concern regarding Server Meshing, and what it will bring in the future.

No-one who knows the backers and the way we follow development so closely, and the way we can reference all previous communications, who listened to that audio on that video would think.. yeah.. that won't be totally confusing sending mixed messages we could totally avoid. You do know they have full editorial control, it wasn't live.

If there is anyone on the planet who should know the power of memes and sound-bite clips it should be... members of the Community Content Team. Experiment or no, some self evaluation prior to publication should not be beyond their capability. Sadly to me it seems to demonstrate again and again they are somewhat out of touch with the community if they can't empathise enough to see how what they produced would go over. I am perfectly happy to accept things take longer than we hoped, or that things can be misunderstood in a project this complex - but I have far less tolerance for unnecessary faux pas that only requires them to pause a moment and take an outside view, they are supposed to be working with us, not against us.

"so this is the start of server meshing in it's current form" - no explanation, letting it go out unedited, no caveats, with no context to a backer community who have been soaked in this core tech for years, knowing every syllable will be chewed over endlessly on Youtube and Twitch (and other social media, quite possibly the gaming press too) with some just waiting for the slightest mis-step to 'have a go'. Talk about Picard-Palm-worthy. I know what he means, but that's because I have the deep-reading daily following context to put it in, not everyone is retired and has many hours to bone up on the subject.


...we basically have a list of stuff we need to nail down open questions, miscommunications between teams, we need to get these 3 key teams all aligned all pointing the same direction so they all fully understand what it is they are building , er we resolve the technical niggles that we have between these teams so they fully understand what it is they are making... - Seriously, no clarification.. no... hey let's think of a better way to phrase that perhaps, considering the context? If I was the manager of a department and my senior staff on an 'essential to progress' project we've been working on for many years and presenting it as 'almost there' were using language like this I'd be thinking... this won't go down well, maybe we should re-shoot that bit! The development team members are not responsible for contextualising information for dissemination, the Community Content Team are, indeed I would argue that is their only job. I don't watch their output for light entertainment.

While I have issues with the way the information was presented in the ISC, there is no reason to think that the teams haven't been working solidly on Server Meshing as it stated on the Progress Tracker and monthly reports, and there is certainly no reason I can see that work done is being abandoned. I do agree the editing and composition of the ISC could give that impression (and that is somewhat disappointing) - but I don't think it is remotely true. I also think the editing and content of the ISC gave the distinct impression of a somewhat surprising lack of coordination between teams, and I'm less sure that isn't the case sadly.

Talking about decoupling Pyro from the need for server meshing there are a couple of possibilities that have been discussed in these forums before, but which were generally not thought to be likely to occur.

1. They allow us to select the star system we want to enter from the main menu - like we select Stanton right now. Obviously this means we can't persist anything except stored ship state and contents into Pyro, no grouping up until you've arrived in system. No continuation of ongoing missions.

2. They make the jump tunnel traversal a loading screen allowing transfer from Stanton DGS's (shards) to Pyro DGS's with the potential for ship state and contents to transfer relying heavily on the enhanced persistence of PES. Some may remember the flight to ground landing zone before pupil to planet was going to be an in-game loading screen, so we know they can do that. This solution does seem to make the comment about the possible issues of persisting missions and player/ship state through the jump gate more understandable or relevant.

The above two possibilities may well suggest to a knowledgeable follower of the project that if this temporary solution was adopted in lieu of server meshing then it suggests they want to give us Pyro and the state of server meshing might delay that entry into Pyro much longer than they were expecting. You don't need a band aid if the gold standard solution is right around the corner.

With server meshing implemented as they have previously described it there wouldn't be any issue of missions persisting through jump gates since you'd remain on the same game universe shard, regeneration does not require body retrieval and yes you might lose your ship and contents if you don't make it through, just like there is no reason not to think missions wouldn't persist after a QT travel between ArcCorp and Hurston. That one phrase alone suggests they are considering putting Pyro into the game before server meshing.

I didn't know it was a typo, I thought there might be a word I hadn't heard of... nothing wrong with learning a new word.

To condense down what I think is the most depressing part of that presentation and the cause for peoples frustration.. We'll give the team leader the final word.

** They weren't all aligned already? It's seems they've been blustering through all muddling around and yet confidently presenting it as a fait accomplis for several years! What was it Chris said? 12 steps for full persistence and only 4 more after that for server meshing back in 2019!

If you completely missed the previous 3 years of communications on the subject I can understand you might see this in a positive light, but since we have been following every jot and tittle on the subject including 3 CitizenCon's virtually dedicated to the subject of the requirement of server meshing to progress any game we care to look forward to, it's thoroughly depressing to find it seems to have existed merely as a nebulous idea in a few guys heads while every other 'chicken' was running around the farmyard scratching at their their own version of what server meshing might be! ...and only now they are going to start getting their ducks in a row?

You think so? How about you list it it all for us less able viewers? I've been following server meshing for years, I never miss any Cloud Imperium output on any subject and I've attended many in-person events to talk to them and see their live presentations. There was nothing new, they did raise questions they haven't before, but nothing new was decided upon.

So please.. I await your 'list of plenty' with curiosity.

Quite so. But since they aired it on a certain date, just like other real world shows we can only surmise he was talking from a perspective of 'now on the record date' rather than the 'now from the perspective of planned air date'. No-one stated it explicitly. I'm fine either way, if they say they will they will and it'll be on the Progress Tracker.

I'm not impressed with this last ISC and it's tone and I've made my view known in another post, but the previous ISC wasn't just 'here's some concepts we'd like to try'... Mr Leyland did say they had planned to begin actual work on building interiors at the end of the quarter, which when you add that the previous ISC was about the Lorville rework was in part preparation for work starting on interiors (the current Lorville buildings being too small). I'd class it more as WIP. They can't start the interior Lorville stuff until the exterior work is done, I presume other buildings in other landing zones may also have had a scale issue affecting plans for interiors.

Jared started off by being a fan of the personalities involved in the game - 'Citizens of the Stars'.

He used introductions to staff.. meet 'so-and-so he's been there done this and that'... he's one of the team doing 'name your key mechanic or fav ship', over in 'name your studio'. When shows were 30 - 60 minutes long and there 3 of them per week without fail this kind of filler was well received by the audience who were generally fully up to speed with what was going on anyway. After-all it was the most senior team members on camera speaking with ultimate authority, answering direct questions from the community.

Then came the likes of Noobifier, SuperMacBros, BoredGamer to condense down from the matey-get-to-know-ya stuff to what those more interested in actual work done wanted to know - all good. So the crew now decide.. hey why don't we condense down and do less filler / repetitive shows.. and we get 2 shows a week and that's IF there are any shows at all, one of which is shrunk to about half it's previous length... the thing is... the 'fluff and filler' is still there. Nothing was condensed down, it was just truncated. The filling remains the same throughout the sandwich, we just get less sandwich - I guess shrinkflation is a thing after-all.

I agree, this weeks ISC did absolutely nothing to inform anyone of anything we did not already know - they have meetings in Q1 to plan work for the year, just like every year it's the s.l.o.w quarter. It must be fun for them to travel on the works' dime and get to meet colleagues in a 'team building, morale boosting exercise'. I know, I've experienced that in my job.

Worse, the title making ti seem there was going to be news and info about server meshing progress made it actually look as if there had been steps backward, they make it sound like the idea of server meshing occurred to them during the meetings this month and now they will 'get to it' as though it hasn't been the topic of conversation and the reason for the extended wait for Pyro solidly for the last 3+ years.

I agree - Yet again they are so excited to be on the 'in' in this game of game development they get to play, while we all get to watch them play game development, what fun they are all having. Star Citizen is by far the most vicarious gameplay experience of any game ever made, no-one can doubt that. It's not the first time has this come across, how many times have we been told Squadron 42 is great and they've all played the run-through's and isn't it fantastic!

It seems we are locked into a recurring nightmare of being 'only fans' playing voyeur to the game of 'let's play game developer' - and paying for the privilege. We get it, the community content teams are big fans of the development teams, bordering on hero worship. I agree, this was tone deaf when viewed from the stand-point of the previous 3 years of hype. The only thing that occurred to me to say at the end of that show was.. 'Well I'm glad you're all having fun' I suppose we'll just have to wait and see if the next 'part 2' actually has any information or whether it airs on the date they said it would. We did get the teaser JPEG for the 'purchasable item to come' didn't we? Sensing a theme here? It's not Luminalia again so soon is it?

Why make an incomplete badly messaged 'part 1' when you could have made the complete message in one sitting? Those meetings took place in January didn't they? Because 10 - 15 minutes 'filler' has to be put out this week, things ran on 'a little more quarters' than they were expecting. Who made this cast-in stone law that any ISC can only be 15 minutes long? There aren't more weekly slots to fill - with less actual facts worth reporting? Not impressed at all.

Let's see what the Youtube-hero synopsises will make of this one.

I'm getting 'out of memory' crashes to desktop when there is plenty of RAM / VRAM left (I'm monitoring system resources on a second screen). Pagefile 32GB, RAM 32GB, VRAM 11GB, shader cache size 10GB. The file that can't be loaded and causes the crash is persistently an 8mb file according to the crash log.

You can log out in your ships bed anywhere and you'll be back there when you log in.

I think they should have small ship / vehicle rental at the Platinum Bay outposts.

The current build is still having 'out of memory CTD's' and 30K's...less than before perhaps but they are still happening. I have 11GB VRAM, 32GB RAM and a swapfile of 32GB and shader cache of 10GB.. there is no reason an 8mb file can't be loaded and for that to lead to a CTD in a stable build. I'm monitoring memory and CPU usage during the game, it never gets above 50% CPU utilisation and 79% RAM utilisation and yet the log says 'out of memory' causes the crashes.

Perhaps they might go to open PTU but it's unlikely they would take the current build to Live since it would be very difficult for anyone to progress and that tends to upset people.

We have the return of issue which is marked as archived. The Graphics Options Menu to select Game Window Mode is overlaying and activating the screen resolution menu underneath. Unable to set window mode to anything but 4K 'borderless'.

I have a R9 3900X and I get stuttering with the last PTU build. It is noticeably taking longer to load assets as you enter an area, particularly at first load in. This is usual for PTU.

They already have a kit-bash system for making space stations. The 'build tech' that goes into them is universal, the only change is the art style to suit the lore.

In light of the general discussion - we already know they have added two planetary landing zone teams in the last year and a half. The first 5 years or so were about tool building which takes highly qualified expensive personnel which are not easy to recruit to achieve, once those tools are made however they can recruit newly qualified college kids to make level design using those tools. The guy who make the river tool (which will also be the road and lava tool) is making it so planetary level designers can use it quickly and easily, he doesn't have to make all the rivers, roads and lava flows himself.

Also I can say from experience since I visited F42UK back in 2016, they definitely do not show everything they have worked on the minute it is made. Some of the things we saw no-one else saw them until around 2 years later, yet they make it seem on Youtube like they just made it yesterday. They were very careful to only show us what they wanted us to see, it was obvious from the way they behaved we weren't seeing what they were currently working on. They show one example of something to show that it can be done.

It would be a mistake to assume the only examples of planets, moons, POI's etc they have made are the one's we've seen. The alpha is a testbed and the majority of stuff made - yes that includes 'content' - is for Squadron 42. They have ships and vehicles no-one has seen yet, as well as player tools, weapons, design styles etc. There are not 2 types of cargo crates and 3 types of loot boxes, the one's in the PU are the only one's they have tested. There are more vending machines than the drinks dispenser and Big Benny's. There's a lot more decorative stuff and furniture than we've seen in the PU, there's just no point in dumping it all into the PU because the servers can't handle it all and what's the point in letting people gawp at it for a while then starting asking for more?

Chris Roberts likes to surprise the players, ask any developer if you meet them in person they'll tell you, also game development is a competitive business, if you tell everyone the unique selling points of your game it gives the competition time to make their own versions. There's no need to go shooting themselves in the foot if they don't have to... and they don't have to.

There are good reasons to believe that there are between 10 and 12 star systems in Squadron 42 at least, there are also good reasons to think that the 'building phase' of level design and art asset production for Squadron 42 Episode One has been completed. It is notable that the monthly reports and Roadmap are predominantly about mechanics, not assets. It is also worth pointing out that many assets were made before there even was a Roadmap.

The current PU is a minimal asset test-bed both because of unnecessary 'spoiler' avoidance but also because they have been at the limits of server performance for years and the only thing that is going to drastically change that is server meshing. No matter what the constantly negative naysayers tell you, they haven't sat on their butts twiddling their thumbs waiting for server meshing. The fact that they have been heavily recruiting artists and level designers in the last 2 years should tell you something.

Played last night:

2 hard crashes to desktop
1 30K
Elevators from the hangar at Port Tressler not working.
Several times the game stopped responding to controls, caused my ship to crash into Port Olisar (?desync?) even though I wasn't close.

Hearing in chat others were having issues on Arc Corp Area 18.

I expect it will be a while before 3.18 goes live.

Last December Chris did say they would be reviewing Chairmans Club perks and rolling them out later this year. Those UEC amounts on top tier packages were set long before there was any economy in the game.

I'm not a fan of rap music normally but the lyrics are well observed humour specific to the game.

The music for the Benny Hill theme tune is called Yakety Sax.

Space pants are no laughing matter, it's serious business. You ask Elon of Jeff.

Funnily enough it was another 'low hanging fruit' I was thinking of offering.

As long as those millions of accounts with unrestricted buyback list entries exist the argument that CCU's adversely affect ship population numbers in the final game is demonstrably laughable, so much so it makes it seem as though no-one really understands what they are doing in the RSI store. Unless the company is aware of every buyback list entry, which I highly doubt, how on Earth do you know what ships are going to populate the game at any one time in the future? Weren't you warning everyone about the Buccaneer price increase recently and marketing making sure a CCU existed in the store for it? Yet CCU's are your main concern regarding future ship population control? Seems an odd strategy to tell everyone about the benefits of stockpiling todays CCU's then warn of the trouble they'll cause in the future... and thank you, I got 4 of them for $20, it's highly unlikely the end point for any CCU chain they are used in will be a Buccaneer, I have old CCU's for Hull E's in my buyback list, I'm fairly sure I'm not the only one.

Buy-to-melt first described to me back in 2015 by a certain Mr Ben Lesnick on this very website's live chat before the buyback list existed means you can't possibly control ship population numbers for any ship sold to date. Even the always limited standalone sales Idris and 890 Jump are / were included in game packages many of which exist now as buyback tokens in backers accounts. Do you know the asking price for a Sabre Raven token is around $2000 currently? What are Idris, Javelins and 890J's likely to go to? After the F5 wars lasting mere minutes how many of them get melted to free up store credit for the next round? How many buyback lists are waiting dormant until they reach their maximum discount value for each entry?

Referring to CCU's in the manner above reminds me of an old British TV road safety cartoon, a man is polishing the front bonnet (hood) of the gleaming car in his garage, meanwhile the rear end has been completed totalled by his teenager son because of lack of ability to 'read the road' previously. We've been putting up warning signs for years. As the word about these existing potential exploits spreads when this project goes global, and it will because it's already doing so, the situation will only snowball. In the beginning when there was only a few thousand of us who were even aware or motivated to use the RSI store to it's full advantage it wasn't such a big deal - a bit of a niche curiosity, the situation has changed there are those becoming aware who have no compunction about exploiting anything or anyone. If the concern is really about future game balance then focusing on CCU's alone and not addressing the buyback list stock availability with the buy-to-melt exploit is decidedly short-sighted in my view, and I'm becoming concerned about the potential for real world abuse that will not just affect a few gamers.

Respectfully.. I disagree... and yes we have had interesting discussions in the past. I remember.

When CIG mooted the idea of the $5 charge for a $0 CCU the 'outcry' was that you would be paying more than the CCU value for a chain of CCU's to any ship. The ultimate price you would have paid would be more than the in-store CCU value of the ship, you were to pay $5 for $0 added ship value. The compromise was the best one, to fold the $5 charge into the store prices of the ships so that you keep the full store CCU value you paid. CIG can charge whatever they like for their digital assets, it isn't 'stealth' anything, you can buy them at current store price or don't buy them, it's more intelligent pricing to avoid an issue in the future. You'll notice there are still ships that have the same price you can't get CCU's between them, this upsets more people than the price changes which a lot of us benefit from - which everyone knew was coming anyway, it's what fuels the 'ship shuffle game'.

Yes, those of us who got the early CCU's prior to the major ship price changes do benefit greatly over those who were either unaware or weren't around as I mentioned in my first post, but the current CCU / Warbond discounts don't even approach the same level of 'discount' and ease of application. When you add those legacy CCU's to the substantial buyback discounts, as I said I can buy back with 3 clicks of the mouse a BMM for $250 and a Carrack for $350 - multiple times, anyone trying to chain a series of Warbond CCU's together to get into the $650 - $700 ship price range are going to have to take some time and effort as well as cash outlay.. I could (and did) stock up the buyback list with buy-to-melt tokens that cost me absolutely nothing, not even waiting time, I can do it in 3 clicks at any time I don't need to wait for a Warbond CCU to fit into a chain. I don't need to wait for that rare item ship to go on sale to start a CCU chain. If you have the accrued resources - such as large amounts of store credit or cash on hand, the buy-to-melt lay-away is the easiest method to profit in the future, it's a guaranteed no loss system, ships never go down in price and you paid nothing for the stock (compared to cash tied up on account 'held' CCU's) you'll always have access to, absolutely no artificial scarcity... that's why they implemented the 'Warbond' system to reduce the use of store credit in the buy-to-melt mechanic, but it doesn't work for, or restrict those who already had their buyback lists filled up.

If you try to recoup your store credit for recycling by melting CCU's you risk the ship price changes making them either invalid or offering no / reduced discount, this doesn't happen with buyback list items, they will always have their discount, they will always be available.

Being as careful as I can I will stick to the example of what anyone can still do today, as opposed to what they could do in the past when there were far less restrictions, let me describe:

You have a ship in your hangar you paid $500 cash for it, ie it has a melt value of $500 store credit. There is a sale of a concept ship for $100 to last 10 days, you know that in a couple of years it's price is going to double, or more. So the $25 Warbond discount for cash may be enticing but it doesn't change the advantage of buyback list stockpiling with recycled credit. Just before the Concept ship sale starts you melt your $500 ship, don't worry you can buy it back at any time with store credit you already have if you have a buyback token - you only need one.

Day 1 - buy 5x $100 Concept ships with your store credit from the RSI store. No extra cash needed, CIG get no more funding from this activity.

Day 2 - melt 5x concept ships and use the store credit to buy 5x more $100 concept ships in the store. Buyback list now has 5x 'free' $100 concept ship entries that cost you nothing but a few mouse clicks.

Day 3 - melt 5x ships, buy 5x ships = 10x free $100 Concept ship tokens in your buyback list.

Day 4 - 10. Rinse and repeat recycling that $500 store credit and each day your buyback list gets 5x more buyback tokens so that by the end of the sale you have 50x buyback tokens, for absolutely no cash outlay at all. Day 11 you use the $500 store credit to buy back the first ship you melted, ergo your 'game' and account hangar are exactly the same as the moment before the Concept Ship sale started. You can still buy the $75 Warbond discounted Concept Ship, nothing described above stops you.

CIG increases the price of that concept ship - now for every buyback list entry you can get that ship at the original $100 price , at any time, each $100 gives you a new ship of value $200, and you have 50 of them that cost you nothing, absolutely nothing... and that's just one ship. This is why LTI was removed from credit sold concept ships because they know people were buy-to-melt stockpiling LTI tokens. On the day they instituted the buyback list was talking to another Concierge member on another platform about what it all meant, and I can't remember whether it was him or me that first used the term 'LTI token', many people are confused by this term, it is not a ship that has LTI, that is just a ship. A 'token' in this sense is a promise from CIG that you can always get an item you don't currently own for a discounted / fixed price - that is the entry in your buyback list, they are the 'tokens' whether they have LTI or not, they are the guarantee that you'll always be able to get that item even if it is restricted for sale in the store, you can have a CCU 'token' in your buyback list to guarantee future access to a restricted sale ship.

The buy-to-melt mechanic, that still exists today if in somewhat more limited form than it was, still affords those same potentially huge discounts in the future depending on what the prices of ships become - this is why you can't get CCU's to the very large ships they feel would unbalance the game if they were available in large numbers. If you had no buyback list discount tokens you would have to use the current RSI store to buy any base ship to apply your stockpiled CCU's to, the higher the base price ship the less 'discount' you are likely to get, the lower the base price the more likely there is to be a wait to complete the CCU chain or any melted CCU's have now become useless to buy back, whereas if I have a stock of say 50x $30 ships with LTI which I can get at any time I have much more scope to use any stockpiled CCU's chained for maximum discount...

...as long as that buyback list allows what it does the problem will always remain even if they abolished CCU's altogether. My buyback list is the most useful because it gives me the biggest discounts coupled with the freedom to use it at any time I choose, no artificial scarcity for me. As I said just like you I haven't paid anywhere near full price for any new concept because of the buyback list, I don't have to wait for sales of ships that fit into any CCU chain I might have, and yes I do have them. If I did sell ships off-site I could have a store front populated with my buyback list options, and the eager 'enthusiasts' think I'm just a nice helpful guy letting them have one of my ships at no extra cost (with LTI they can't get in the RSI store) but really I'm taking their cash money, using my buyback list discount and keeping the extra there is no limit on me buying from my buyback list for cash.. which of course makes it a lot easier the next time a concept ship sale happens, I don't need to dig into my own pockets. Add to that, I'm getting plenty kudos and Concierge status goodies because I'm using cash to buy multiples of ships even though they are discounted, which add up on my account. The obvious marker being that although I've spent thousands on my account as far as CIG are concerned I've given away thousands of dollars worth of ships to 'friends'.. their received 'gifts' don't add to their Concierge status, but their cash to me does boost my Concierge status.

So tell me how laboriously stockpiling CCU's, which if I want a substantial discount for I've got to spend cash, in a mad race during any sale period (which I would potentially lose the benefit of if I melt them later) is easier than the buyback list 'buy-to-melt' zero-cost-to-me guaranteed future availability and future profit?

As I said, CIG customer services were distracted by the stockpiling of CCU's annoyance in 2016 / 2017, when they should have thought more about the buyback list potential abuse. The credit token was a waste of time once the buyback lists were already populated, it only affects people who don't misuse the system now. The Warbond sales (the restriction on credit use rather than discounts) only partially addresses the issue but the one measure which would guarantee there was no profit to abusing the 'generosity' (insert eye-roll here) of the marketing division would be to end the ability to always buy back ships at the original price paid... just like they did with CCU's. They could also say that you can't melt any standalone ship for a minimum of 14 days which would prevent buy-to-melt recycling. There is no other company that would offer the same facility to their customers to be able to endlessly exchange and re-buy goods at the original price forever. There are those who think I'm an inveterate white knight, but as you can see, I'm under no delusions that CIG might be lacking in their ability to look at their systems and realise they might be stockpiling future problems. @Zyloh-CIG Blaming the customer is not the answer. 'If you build it they will come' is the adage, and marketing division built this edifice even in the face of many calls to think again... they were laser focused on facilitating a group in the community which Sandi now happily calls 'snowflakes' on camera.

It's odd. My April 2014 account, which is my main account - this one, got only the Monkey envelope. My 2021 second account got the Ram and the Monkey envelope, and my 3 other 2022 accounts all got the Monkey envelope.

I did say the worse culprit is the buyback at original price. I don't see the relevance of discussing the $5 CCU charge, the fact that they removed the $0 CCU option is enough to paint the accurate picture.

We have been suggesting this to them from the very beginning, only allow purchase of CCU's for ships you already have on your account and apply them automatically at checkout, unfortunately the noisy few who were making the most use of the CCU exploit were more 'noisy'.

Every measure they instituted only disadvantaged bona-fide players, it hardly affected the offsite selling at all, Warbond CCU's replaced $0 CCU's as the 'go-to' exploit to make money when Warbond was supposed to stop it. We've pointed this out to them many many times.

They did start to remove $0 CCU's from accounts back in 2017 but they made a mistake, some CCU's became $0 (or negative dollar) after ship price changes that had not existed before so that CCU's that some backers paid money for were removed - so they halted the process of deleting them from accounts after only a few days, and they never started it again. It never occurred to them to start with those accounts that had the most 'gifting' going on in them. We pointed out the exploit potential to them from the day they put the facilities in to allow it to happen, when they didn't respond we thought the best thing to do was make everyone aware of those exploits so that it wasn't just a greedy few who would benefit from the weakness of the system. We never expected them to allow it to continue for years.

You don't need $0 CCU's to make money from selling ships, the buyback list stockpiled with credit bought 'buy to melt' ships can do that just fine, massively inflated buyback lists are the problem more than CCU's. There is no limit on the number of ships you can get from your buyback list with cash... and if someone else is giving you cash then you don't need 'credit tokens', they were a merely an inconvenience to 'real' backers, they were never (and still aren't) a problem for the profiteers.

It wasn't the $0 CCU's that allowed the most egregious exploits, they were just the biggest annoyance to customer services and that was a deliberate strategy to deflect attention away from the buy back list exploit, it was the buyback list that allowed someone to buy back any melted ship or game package at the original price they paid (on my account I can buy back several ships and game packages at original concept price with LTI, a BMM for $250 with LTI for example). If you knew there was a 10 day sale and you had $250 cash during the concept sale you buy the BMM on day one, day 2 melt the BMM and rebuy with store credit, rinse and repeat for the next 9 days, every melt puts one copy into your buyback list forever so that even though you only spent $250 cash on day one of the sale, you ended up with 10x $250 LTI BMM's in your buy back list, you can go back to your buyback list and buy that BMM for $250 today even though it now costs $650 in the store without LTI. Every buy back list BMM concept sale token you collected back in 2016 for no more cost than 3 mouse clicks 'saves you' $400 compared to today's store prices, and there are dozens of other ships with similar store price increases since they were concepted. The Carrack for example, and the Orion.

If they changed the system so that buybacks had to be at todays store prices just like CCU's the off-site sellers would virtually disappear overnight because they don't keep stocks of ships they paid actual money for on their accounts, there is no restriction to gifting if the base ship was bought with cash and why would having cash be a problem if someone else is giving you the cash in the first place? Without direct player to player gifting of ships there would never have been a problem. They don't need to pay to keep stock on their accounts as long as they have access to a stocked up buyback list which guarantees a permanent ever-increasing discount for them. I've got plenty on my account I haven't paid full store price for any ship that has had a CCU to it since 2016, every time they increase the price of a ship they make my next 'big-job ship' store purchase cheaper because they made it possible and they kept it possible even after being advised about that exploitation potential. It's not a bug, it's the feature they intended.

Now watch how 'upset' some people's replies to this comment will be. I wonder why. More-over this thread will get locked and probably deleted, because to talk about it is to explain how it works. How convenient for those who already know, and have known for years. How inconvenient for those who don't know and don't understand why limited sale ships and packages are a thing when they can get those same ships off-site from some nice helpful guys who insist they are 'helping the project' while they help themselves. Imagine if you had 100 BMM's at $250 each in your buyback list? Instant high-roller Concierge status right, yet you didn't spend a penny of your own money? That's just one ship out of the line-up.

Did I miss something? What happened with Camural?

Up to now the ticket price has been around $100.

They will choose a venue that can accommodate at least 1000 people, probably closer to 2000 or more.

There is usually a very long queue to get in and they invariably open the doors late, at Manchester it took over 2 hours to get everyone in through security checks. When it rained in Manchester while we waited outside they came and gave us free umbrellas. If you have a bag they will search it but they generally don't do body searches aside from metal detectors.

There will be a place with multiple vendors for food and drinks - expensive, overpriced. At the 2015 CitizenCon in Manchester the food was provided but you had to pay for drinks at the bar. It was a more 'barcitizen' type feel in 2015 I had a long chat with Erin Roberts there, whereas the 2019 Manchester CitCon had a much more 'corporate managed' feel. It's unlikely they will choose a venue that has included catering now.

There will be some sort of display, at the last in Manchester it was the entrance foyer Carrack ice carving being made. At previous CitCon's they have had large ship models. there will be a lot of 'event type' banners and imagery relating to 'in-lore fiction'.

There will be a cosplay competition and some community members will be roaming around in their cosplay gear.

You get a 'swag bag' with stuff in it, but often they aren't organised enough to give them out at the door and you may have to go back and get them. You'll have a security tag and wristband.

During the event, for meal breaks etc, there will be dev team members you can talk to and the senior members usually have a table for signing stuff like posters and Chairmans Club Handbooks / taking selfies. Long queue, time limited, this is not the time to chat to the team members.

There will be booths for organisations to recruit from or for Streamers / Youtubers you can meet and greet, they give out merch.
There will be booths for 'official approved' merchandise sellers.

At the last CitCon one of the booths was 3 developers designing the Sextant which was part of the digital CitizenCon client reward.

Here are some videos I took at the last Manchester CitizenCon - just skip your way through them. I recommend you bring a camera and tripod as well as your phone if you can.

Many people have given the correct answer, that it is one game universe with a single-player campaign set in it, but by also stating that the definitive answer is 'unknown now'.. that's the part that isn't true. We have been told that Squadron 42 takes place inside the Star Citizen universe exactly as it was originally described. Jared Huckaby, a couple of years ago, described Squadron 42 as 'One huge dynamic mission inside the PU'. This has never changed.

Anyone who thinks that Squadron 42 is unnecessary, or not relevant to their Star Citizen experience, simply doesn't understand what the project is about. It's hard for some to wrap their head around I know but the current PU is a playable alpha small-scale limited demo. There's a reason the coming star systems all link into the star systems in Squadron 42 (check it on the Star Map), because you'll be going through those star systems to get to start Squadron 42. You have to 'sign up' from within the PU.

The important part to remember is that in both games you can play the exact same character if you chose to, you retire from military service into a free-roam persistent universe where Squadron 42 is recent history and the parts of the universe, the characters and the organisations in Squadron 42, can and will remain in the PU, some of them will know you from your time in Squadron 42.

While in the military you have a military history log and you can collect and own items and money (you get military pay), those go with you when you retire to 'the verse'. NPC AI in Star Citizen will refer to your exploits in Squadron 42, some will consider you a hero, others may consider you the jackboot heel of the hated militaristic UEE. Some side missions will start in Squadron 42 and continue in the PU. You will be faced with choices in Squadron 42, the choices you make will directly affect how you are treated in the PU and may even lead to content, like places you can go or 'people you can interact with' in the PU only ex-military (those who played Squadron 42) can access, like the Helios system or the Kilian system for example. Chris talked about this in 2018 during the CitizenCon presentation when he mentioned USO-type clubs for ex-military, he also talked about it in 2016 during a Squadron 42 special Q&A, you can see references to it in the lore.

The Vanduul war does not end with Squadron 42 Episode One, it will be still going on when the PU launches yet you'll notice the current PU doesn't reference the Vanduul War anywhere (it is referenced in advertising blurb and videos relating to military service - Invictus Launch Week for example) because from your current player perspective in the PU it hasn't happened yet. Go and read the Hurston Dynamics Corp history wall, a major arms manufacturer for the UEE and it's role in the Vanduul War isn't mention in that history timeline.

The difficulty some have is that they miss the fact that the clock starts ticking as soon as you enter the games' universe (this what they refer to as 'persistent'), either the PU or Squadron 42, you can't go back in time with the same character and the game world is not separated like other games with a multiplayer tacked on - the PU timeline always moves forward and so does the timeline in Squadron 42. You play the game in real time and the only thing you can do is pause time or move forward time via sleeping, very similar to Skyrim V except you don't choose your save game, the game does and it's always the last saved game spot you move on from.

This is why it has to be a single-player campaign because the choices your character makes have to be yours alone. The only way to play the game making different choices in Squadron 42 is to start the whole campaign again with a brand new character, which is why in the Death of a Spaceman letter to the community they talked about 'character slots'. This is why some older backers in the community know to have multiple game packages because they ARE character slots - even though they are a tiny minority. Those who wonder about future funding don't realise, some Squadron 42 character slots will be repeat sales to existing customers.

You can replay the combat sections of Squadron 42 in the Arena Commander simulator, cooperatively with friends, but of course because it is not in the game universe it doesn't affect your characters' history. This was exactly the same in Wing Commander Prophecy, you couldn't go back in time with a character and you could only replay the combat sections in the 'in-verse' simulator.

Just like the real world there is training and experiences you gain in the military - example a lot of civilian airline pilots trained in the military - it will be the same in the PU, you will need 'licenses' for vehicles and certain equipment that is limited use. If you join the PU as a civilian you'll have to have a pilots license to be able to fly a ship. Certain mission types will require you to have security clearances you can only get in the military. There will be certain places in the PU where only military and ex-military are allowed to go. Frontline military equipment and ships (the F8C Lightning for example) are only legally owned and used by those who gained the license to own and use them from the military or by special award for service via the UEE government (Chairmans Club), civilians without military experience won't legally be allowed to own and operate the F8C, which means you can't go to a ship store and buy it. This is why in the current PU they keep referring to the 'relevant combat experience' in missions like Xenothreat or Siege of Orison. The idea is that as ex-military you are expected to 'keep current' with frontline military equipment, but civilians aren't allowed to own and operate ships (legally) if they are a significant threat to UEE forces.

Have you ever been to Klescher Rehabilitation Facility? Have you noticed that when you have served your time and can leave the announcer voice refers to you as 'civilian'?

Citizenship can be achieved 3 ways:
You can buy it - it will be expensive.
You can earn it via assisting UEE forces, like the Advocacy via the CDF for example - it will take a long time.
You get it awarded immediately you sign up for military service - the only way for a player to do that currently is by starting Squadron 42.

You cannot earn or buy ex-military status without starting Squadron 42.

Citizenship can be revoked by the UEE - for criminal activity and criminal history for example.

Whether you are a citizen or a civilian, whether you are ex-military or not, will have a very big impact on your experience within the Star Citizen universe because it's all connected, it is all one big universe. The current Alpha PU doesn't represent the final intended game experience, not even close.

For the first time ever (afaik) outside of their Youtube / Twitch channels they have spent money on advertising the game (including Squadron 42) on Reddit in the last month.

I see these posts about being griefed and ganked and I wonder if they are playing the same game I am or even the same game that most Youtubers and Twitch streamers I watch are playing.

I play for hours and never get any issue except bugs, mainly in PTU. I played Siege of Orison and found that the other players were more than happy to cooperate, several healed me without even asking - most just ignored me. All you have to do is accept the mission and hang back to automagically earn 400K+ / hour. I've been looting bodies for armour and weapons while the mission was ongoing! I've spent many hours looting bodies on Solanki platform without any ongoing mission alongside other players doing the same thing and no-one bothers anyone. If you get to the good stuff first it's yours, if they get there first it's theirs. There's more than enough gear to go around. Someone claiming the FS9 is the OP weapon in the game, you can pick up around 3 - 5 of them, plus ammo, for every visit to Solanki platform and you can do several visits per hour. Go naked, gear up, go back store the gear in local inventory, come back naked and repeat until you get thoroughly bored and your inventory has enough to last you as long as you need so that if you lose an outfit/weapons you have them replaced before you've even left the hospital room.

Last night I was around Port Olisar and on Cellin (PTU) going around the outposts just looting, saw a couple of other players, they never bothered me.

Generally I just leave if there are other ships around POI's, it's no problem to go elsewhere and come back later. Also.. don't park your ship and leave it full of stuff you wouldn't want to lose, no-one else can access local inventories that are holding your stuff. Don't keep all your eggs in one basket unless you have to and if you do, get in and get out as fast as possible. Never request hangar doors to be opened unless your shields are fully charged and you're ready to zoom out as soon as the doors open.

There are fairly easy skills to adapt to that reduce your chances of being caught unaware. When you come out of QT get up to max speed asap, don't dawdle, get your drive spooled up and a QT POI chosen asap, any.. it doesn't matter as long as it's away from where the trouble is. If there is someone there choose an empty area of space to zoom into then decouple and turn to face them, they are coming onto your guns and missiles while you are flying away from theirs, their closing time to your weapons is reduced while the closing time between their weapons and missiles to you is extended... in this situation they can't even use noise and flares because they get ejected behind them but you can, if they turn to avoid your fire they can't catch you fast enough to stop you jumping out. You can fire missiles while the QT drive is calibrating so choose your QT POI appropriately. If you mostly do the single-player shoot and scoot defensive play you don't need gimbals. If they are using QT snares, which is very rare, then get out of the POI to POI traffic lanes, easy enough.

The reason so many 'die' is because they are so much in a rush to do what they want to do they don't plan or take a little more time to prepare. Just last night someone was complaining the only rock worth mining was Quantanium, that shows the attitude, it has to be get rich quick with minimal thought time and effort or the game is just 'bad' in their view. You don't need millions of credits to play the game and there's hardly any point in buying ships in the game - soon to be wiped - when you can rent them. It costs 51.5K to rent a Prospector for a day, you can make enough to rent 2 in just over an hour easily, no more worries about wait timers.. you'll be back on the job within 10 minutes of being 'ganked' if you thought ahead.

I have the 'big job' multi-crew ships, but there's not much point in taking them out and then complaining about the reclaim timer if you aren't going to 'multi-crew' the multi-crew ships. You can rent plenty of ships with reclaim timers of less than 2 minutes to do most of what you want, and it is fairly easy to make enough credits to keep spares of components and stuff in your local spawn point inventory. Vary it up a bit, combine activities to maximise income. Some looting / selling, some box delivery missions, some light trading, some wreck / cave raiding - you can do these things all at once. I scratch my head and wonder why so many think they can only do 'one mission at a time'. The game is supposed to simulate living a future life, no-one lives a life where they only ever do one activity to the exclusion of all others.

Just going around looting boxes at outposts can bring in over 100K / hour if you take the time to learn where to look, I never have to buy weapons or armour (and that's without doing any missions) and I have loads of them by the end of the first day on a patch, because they are 'free' I can go anywhere and not worry about losing them because they'll be replaced faster than I can lose them. You only have to do one bunker mission to get enough weapons and armour to last a month - if you plan ahead and accept there is a little grind involved... this gets waaay easier if you buddy up with just one other person.

Painting the game as some endless grief-fest is just so wide-of-the-mark-untrue it can't be anything else other than trolling to scare of the curious from what I see, 99% of the time I play by myself and hardly ever get any bother. There was a Youtuber brand new to the game a few days ago, relied totally on chat to show him the ropes and he played solidly - live - for 4 hours+... got fully stocked up with gear, with credits to spare, and he wasn't even getting the most helpful advice. What do people expect to achieve in 4 hours total play time? There is nothing wrong with the game, it is not 'unbalanced', most get by just fine, however some lack the problem solving skills and patience for a game of this type... Don't worry Arena Commander is there for the needs of those types of players.

Confidently incorrect. The method is different, the output is exactly the same it doesn't change how persistence works it just makes it faster to access the database for look-ups.

It will be a loooong time before Cloud Imperium overcome the real world problem of signal travel time, there will be regional shards for the foreseeable future which means we will get more star systems before we get a single unified shard.

I think you're right, you probably don't understand server meshing in Star Citizen... but there is something else you've missed. All the games you mention take place on one planet in a limited region area. The play space in Star Citizen is massive, epically massive. Part of the reason this multiplayer still has a 90% population of NPC's planned is because the players will be so spread out (like No Mans Sky) that you'll barely see another player unless you intend to. Stanton isn't even at it's full size right now, there is the Aaron Halo still to come. Even now when we have only the Stanton system (which is supposed to be above averagely populated) the majority of times I play I don't see other players. Pyro is much bigger than Stanton, it has 6 planets spread further apart, and Nyx is basically empty.

It seems to work for me. Sometimes the connection to the database is not good and it takes a couple of tries, you just have to wait and keep trying, but this reaction delay applies to other things in the game as well as inventory. It is improving.

I had a Terrapin.. I didn't fall in love with it. I CCU'd it to the MSR.

Well isn't this nice, I have to eat FOMO again. Yum yum.

When it was wave 1 I played for hours with a few 30K's and one crash. Yesterday after wave 2 it hard a hard crash forcing a restart and Orison which had been very stable was glitching constantly. All the 'flying vehicles' were rapidly switching orientation and sometimes disappearing.

Perhaps the reason you have to keep asking 'basic questions' already answered many times is because you don't read full sentences? A pen or a fingertip helps to keep your place as you read... you can also highlight with the mouse cursor.

Arena Commander and Star Marine are games within the game. It is an offshoot from the MilSim training module. You will use the Original Systems modules inside the game, it was that way in the beginning, you stepped into the simulator in your hangar. Obviously the priorities for the PU changed.. but there has been no suggestion from Cloud Imperium that the original plan has changed.

There is no replay of the story sections for Squadron 42, once you have made choices they are fixed for your character. The only way to make different choices is to start with a new character from the beginning again. You can only replay the combat sections of the missions in the simulator which does not affect your characters history and reputation, it is also where you will do your training missions.

The Original Systems simulator is not a separate part of the project, it is an integral part of the game and it's lore.

The core tech has been steadily built. No other project of this scale has ever tried to do full persistence in an MMO that has first person gameplay.

The only blocker to player owned habs was persistence.. it's still in PTU wave 1, 3.17.5 doesn't have full persistence. It's not really a surprise that they are now talking about building interiors since it logically follows on from persistent entity streaming.

Paid items and subscription items can be found in loot boxes all around the game for free, they are not exclusive to those who pay for them, exactly like ships aren't exclusive to those who pay for them. We don't have personal effects insurance but it is planned and it won't be limited to 'paid items', it will be accessible to all just like we have the same ASOP terminal insurance for ships bought in the game.

It is not clear what you're asking exactly, so rather let's talk about how servers are loaded currently and how they will be loaded when server meshing comes online.

All the information about the game space has to written to the server hard drive. There is one game build which contains all of the Stanton system objects and it is loaded to every server hard drive whether anyone is using parts of that space or not. All this duplicated data transfer has to carried over the network that controls the servers. Server Object Container Streaming determines if an area in the Stanton system is being used or not and so if it isn't it is streamed out of server RAM and back in as needed, the information about the game build remains on the server hard drive as long as it is running. There was local (running) persistence but once a server is shut down there is no persistence, the server is wiped and all player activity not recorded to the player database (anything in storage for example) is lost. Each server is loaded with an exact same copy of the game world as the dev's built it with player owned assets loaded in afterward.

The server game build is going to change to allow smaller parts of the game universe to be loaded onto server hard drives, one planet and it's moons per server for example, the servers are then meshed to allow seamless transition between different servers' area of authority. This is static server meshing and 'sharding'. The Stanton system can be broken over several servers hard drives with each server having a fixed (static) boundary of authority. Server Object Container Streaming still controls what is loaded into RAM, according to player activity.

Dynamic Server Meshing refers to the ability of the server to expand or contract it's boundary of authority within a shard, this means dynamically writing / re-writing to the hard drive of a server as it is running to expand or contract it's area of authority within a shard. It is more efficient because each server can expand and contract it's area of authority according to what players are doing. It could contain the whole game universe or, multiple star systems, or just one building. It is also efficient because it avoids huge (potentially unused) data writes to every server hard drive.

Persistent Entity Streaming does a very similar thing to Object Container Streaming except that the information is not stored on the servers local hard drive to load into RAM, it is kept on a remote network and called as players demand - so that if you (or any player) are in an area PES will say if there are things there - which are not part of the games base build features - which should be added and what state they should be in when they are added. Entity Graph keeps a record of all dynamic objects in the game and sends a 'snapshot record' back to the persistence database every few seconds to milliseconds so that database can inform any servers spinning up about the total state of the game universe... including any mines your Nautilus has laid.

Does that make things clearer for you?

How on earth do you know what they have done or not? Why do you get question what are priorities? You haven't seen Squadron 42 anymore than anyone else and we know they have features and mechanics for that that will come to the PU.

This is a test-bed alpha, it's running at maximum server capacity to test limited features only. You are the one assuming the only things you see in the PU are the only things they have ready for when the server architecture can support them.

Why are they re-making Lorville? Because when Lorville was first designed it was made to run on one server holding the whole Stanton system.

Ropes can be used to climb rock faces and buildings, but also rope simulation applies to refuelling hoses and electrical cables to run a bypass on damaged parts of ship relays. So it covers exploration gameplay, game world traversal for missions, refuelling, engineer gameplay. It could be used for hoist slings to transport large objects by ships, it can be used to capture and tie up people and creatures. Lot's of possible uses.

I'm perfectly calm... and you are severely misinformed. Who do you think has been working on persistence and server meshing all these years? Have you watched the last 2 CitizenCon presentations? It's not 'White Knighting' to keep up with events, or do you consider anyone who disagrees with your ill-informed edicts a white knight?

What is the drive on the new 'old' PC formatted to? Are you sure it is NTFS?

Have you installed the RSI Launcher to the default address and the game to the default address?

It is best not to install Star Citizen and the RSI Launcher within the protected Windows file system structure (like the folder 'Program Files' for example) because you can run in to folder access permissions with Windows. It often fails as you describe when the Launcher and Star Citizen game folder are installed to different drives.

1. Make sure the drive you want to install the game to is formatted to NTFS.

2. Create a folder in the root of that drive ie D:/RSI/ - this is now your game root folder. If you don't have a separate drive then install the RSI Launcher to a folder on the root of your C drive. ie C:/RSI/

3. Uninstall the RSI Launcher completely, re-install to the game root folder you created. ie D:/RSI/ or C:/RSI/

4. In the game root folder you should see a folder called RSI Launcher. Copy the StarCitizen folder and contents to this same folder, your game root folder called 'RSI'. If you have been changing install directories it may have messed up the StarCitizen folder structure, make sure there isn't a folder inside the StarCitizen folder called 'StarCitizen'. If there is just re-copy the folder from your laptop to the game root folder ('RSI') and delete all the folders in the 'Program Files/Roberts Space Industries' directory.

5. Run the RSI Launcher, sign in - DO NOT HIT INSTALL. Top right go to 'Settings' tab and scroll down to where it says 'Library Folder' make sure the game root folder address is there ie 'D:/RSI/'

6. Hit 'Verify', the manifest will download and then any files needed to update.

Good luck.

I was on Solanki platform looting some bodies in 3.18, I went onto the shuttle bus to put all the loot I'd collected in the local inventory. I was alt-tabbing between the game and Resource Monitor and the game crashed, my system restarted (GPU had been between 97% and 100%). I restarted my PC, restarted the game game client and lo and behold I was back on the shuttle between Solanki platform and the player hab platform in exactly the same place with the same gear.

There were other 30K's where I was spawned back in the hab, the things I had been wearing were still on me and the thing I had in my hand was by the bed on the floor. Here's something that brought a smile to my face - the first server I had spent 2 hours on was server 060, it crashed with a 30K. I switched server 3 times due to server crashes in quick succession until the game became stable again. Later I landed on server 060 which had obviously restarted with PES to find all the stuff I had placed on Solanki platform (armour, flight suits and weapons) was exactly where I had left it - even after the server restart. PES is definitely working!

Are you serious? Are you saying you don't know the difference between network solutions and simple webpage design?

Cloud Imperium has a part ownership of Turbulent now and the Montreal office is merely a way to expand the role of an existing company rather than making a whole new entity. It doesn't matter what the name on the door says, it matters what they produce. The two Montreal sandbox teams produce in game assets in exactly the same way F42DE and F42UK do.

Or just plain bullshit. Can't set roll on X axis without messing up freelook and 'F' menu? Seriously?

There are those who years ago made accounts just to spread FUD and this is the typical M.O. Old account, low post count and 'new player experience'. Buy the game and refund - no loss just inconvenience to CIG. We see it many times here and on Reddit. Totally deniable of course and what 'toxic' people we are for pointing it out.

They keep bringing up the argument that CIG isn't as successful as people think because of a few whales making dupe accounts, there is no evidence for it but it makes sense they would assume it to be true because that is what they decided to do back in 2015 / 2016 so that one negative dissenting voice could become 20, 30 or more. They flood the forum front page with FUD and bait threads on weekends and holidays / events to give newcomers a appearance of a bad experience in these forums and the game generally. These guys may not be on-the-up-and-up honest and likeable, but they aren't stupid. For some they are veterans of such activity in other games like EvE Online and RUST, they've been doing it for years.

I played for 9 hours last night into the early morning going back and forth between Orison and Solanki platform, I saw one player at Orison he jumped on the shuttle fully armoured and tooled up. He pointed his gun at me as soon as we were out of the armistice zone while I was in my underwear, he went running off onto the platform, I could hear him shooting at the NPC's, and I just continued looting the bodies.

Yet you're the one posting 'generalisations' memes in response to a specific post about Cloud Imperium and the attitudes some in the community hold toward them?

Yet you're the one posting 'generalisations' memes in response to a specific post about Cloud Imperium and the attitudes some in the community hold toward them?

Your long post about problems within a game team were generalisations, there is nothing in that post that specifically relates to Cloud Imperium and you didn't give specifics relating to Cloud Imperium.

I have met the team members on many occasions and toured their F42 UK office in 2016. The one theme they keep bringing up is that working for Cloud Imperium is not like working for the other companies they have had experience with. They feel encouraged to take novel approaches or to approach management with new ideas, the addition of race tracks to the PU for example. More than anyhting they stress how different it feels to have such a close relationship with the community, they feel they are making the community's game rather than the company's game.

At the last BarCitizen in Manchester I asked Jared Huckaby some pointed questions and he gave honest answers. With reference to your generalised post regarding work culture he did say that some hires to Cloud Imperium didn't fit in and didn't understand the different ethos that Cloud Imperium takes toward it's commitment to the community. He talked about how they bring ideas and attitudes from other game development companies. He gave a specific example which I won't talk about here but in that example he was explaining how Chris prioritises what is right for the backers, rather than the company. Had that person worked at another company what he wanted to do would have been the norm, but it was not for this project. He told me that person no longer works at Cloud Imperium.

The final question I asked him was "Did we do a good thing or has it become too big and corporate now?" He seemed shocked and said "No!", it's the same as it always was, a dedicated team aiming to make the best damn game for the community and anyone at any level can raise issues directly with the management and they'll be listened to. There are hundreds of them working there now and the idea that inherent problems wouldn't be leaked out seems fairly preposterous to me given how much we interact with them in person and how easy it is to go anonymous online.

In my working life i have had the opportunity to work for many companies and I learned how to gauge the culture of a workplace very quickly, there are obvious signs of stress in the work place - none of which I saw at F42 UK.

Starfield is not an MMO, it's a single-player game. I'm not aware of any MMO space game that Ubisoft is working on. AGOS is also a single-player VR game. Most of the reviews for AGOS on Steam tend to be negative.

A lot of it depends on what settings you choose and what monitor you use and the settings for it. Very few probably have calibrated monitors and an equal number wouldn't settle for very high contrast lower brightness gameplay. I note you don't mention whether your monitor is calibrated.

I have a 4K monitor so having anti-aliasing isn't really worth bothering with, by putting up the contrast significantly and lowering brightness you can achieve pretty close to CI's video quality on 4K however unfortunately when in areas that are dark it's very difficult to play the game that way. It's also very likely that that the team doing video capture for trailers and promo's have access to config switches we aren't privvy to such as CryEngines native HDR.

3.18 allows players to land on Solanki platform for the Solanki mission.

You don't keep up to date much do you? DGS Crash Recovery comes with Server Meshing which comes with 4.0 which comes with Pyro.

Not with WiFi probably but via USB tethering it seems to work.

Citizen Kate (and Will) made a YT video of Solanki platform 3.18 PTU mission. They had a missing guy, turns out he was in a blacked out elevator iirc.

Are you in the UK? I've got 5G via O2 and it works fine via IPv4 USB tethering through my Motorola phone.

Anyone can pay in USD. I'm in the UK and sometimes it's better in USD and sometimes it's better in GBP. The only reason to pay in your local currencies is if it is cheaper. If the difference approaches around 8 - 10% then it is worth the bother. If the price difference goes a couple of percentage points above 10% for a sustained period CIG always adjust, they have in the past. Don't forget the EU and UK have VAT to pay on digital purchases, that is nothing to do with CIG, generally they make the exchange rates favourable toward those of us who have to pay sales tax but they can't follow fluctuations on a monthly basis.

Don't forget they also let us have significant discounts with Warbonds and buybacks... I haven't paid full price for anything in years, except subscription. If CIG are so money grubbing as you suggest why do they let us buy anything back at the original price paid no matter how it has increased since we exchanged it for store credit? Because of buyback + CCU's I get around $450 discount on any ship above $655 reachable with a CCU... because I can still get BMM's at around $200 each - with LTI. They always offer Warbond discounts and CCU chains at sales.

EDIT - If you bought the 100i game package at 20% Luminalia discount and used a referral code you would have saved $45 from the price of two ships, if you include the free UEC it comes to a total package discount of just under 45% because you got $90 package value for $40, with current in store Warbond CCU offerings you could use that to save $70 off the price of any ship $380 or over. So it's not even just old accounts that can save significantly. They do this type of thing almost every month, but no-one has to pay more than base package price, you can get them all in the game just by playing the game.

The persistent entity database can be as big as they need it to be, there is no theoretical upper limit.

Yes server meshing will allow many more hundreds of thousands of entities per server on a shard especially since the number of servers per shard is also limitless.

Whole ship salvaging will cure the entrance blocking issue. There's no need to find a solution to an issue which will solve itself.

Thank you for drawing my attention to the page you linked above, I had not seen it yet. Having read the section on the main page I can not see any stated requirement to have logged in for the event on previous occasions. It simply states:

edit - it's worth noting that this years horror mask promotion was a repeat of previous years in-game offerings... when 3.18 arrives I will have 2x Hill Horror masks and 2x Vanduul masks on my main account.

Do you have a link to any statement from Cloud Imperium that stipulates that 'long time players' must have logged in to the PU during the event in previous years? My read of it suggests it is merely a repeat offer to gain previous years event items if you might have missed them the first time.

I am not familiar with the word 'Austacious'.

I Googled and found the only reference is in an urban dictionary where it is given the meaning:
Aw-stay-shyuh-ss (Adjective) Peculiar. Strange. Weird. It means something is weird, but very weird. Curious. Unexpected. Unbelievable.
That’s Austacious. That’s weird.

Did you intend to use the word 'Auspicious?

Yes, they could use Ambient Light it is part of CryEngine, but they don't.

They started in 2011 on a planned concept demo with 12 people working out of a spare room. Outside contractors, aside from a few concept artists, were not engaged until 2013 - after the Kickstarter.

Stating that all games begin with companies starting from scratch has it as implicit in it's argument that as far you are concerned they all start from day 0 as CIG has. They don't. Hello Games is somewhat comparable they formed in 2008, but the planned scope of No Man's Sky is nowhere near that of Squadron 42 or Star Citizen. Frontier Developments began as a company on 28th January 1994. Bethesda was formed on June 28th 1986.

Perhaps you're not as brutally honest as you think you are?

Build company, dev team, dev tools, game engine then the game (single player campaign and massive open world sandbox MMO)? No. There are no games of this scope being made by a start-up company.

Even Starfield with existing company, dev teams, dev tools, creation engine, simpler game model sans features has taken 5+ years. (There are 4 cities planned for Starfield).

Hello Games began ground work for No Man's Sky in 2011 and it has been in continual development since, it doesn't have the same feature level as the current PU.

Star Citizen (the PU) has been a Live playable Alpha release project since 23rd December 2015.

Elite Dangerous was released as a live game 16th December 2014 and still (likely never will) doesn't have many of the features the current PU has. The Odyssey expansion took 5 years of development. While there are potentially trillions of star systems to roam around in 7 years less than 0.05% has been 'discovered' by players.

When you are comparing apples to oranges it's worth remembering that very few other games have a live playable game in continual development while working toward a final release that will cost no more to the player than the initial outlay, and none (including those games with paid addons) have the same scope (feature level depth) or level of hand-crafted game experiences.

Game packages purchased before 2016 include both Squadron 42 Episode One and the MMO.

Complain all you want, but let's try to at least keep it honest.

You've missed the point, the connections aren't just because they are on the Starmap it's because there are no cutscene / menu screen jumps in Squadron 42. You have to go system to system. We also know that Squadron 42 has been described as 'a giant dynamic mission in the PU'. In order to reach the S42 locations the star systems have to connect to existing systems. As we can see on the map the route from Stanton to Odin goes through Pyro and Nyx... so no surprise they are the ones currently being worked on. (it's also worth knowing that originally the Alpha PU was going to be the Terra Nova system)

Extrapolating out that the other system we know is in S42 is Vega we can calculate a route from existing ones either in the PU planned or S42 to Vega. We also know we join as a rookie pilot, all naval and marine training takes place on MacArthur in the Kilian system.

Breaking it all down SQ42 and the PU together are likely to come with around 14 star systems, and Magnus is likely one of them... for the main reason you have to go through that system to get to locations we expect to see.

Something that is new: You can now choose a non-equipped item (on the floor for instance) and drag it into your inventory.

3.17.4 Live or 3.18 PTU?

If it's the PTU just reset and don't go into the character creator, the game will load with the default male character. It's a known bug.

Are you pulling my leg?

CPU (central processing unit) is a generalized processor that is designed to carry out a wide variety of tasks (in sequential fashion), for example positioning vertices in a given volume of space on a 3D model or creating a Word document. GPU (graphics processing unit) is a specialized processing unit with enhanced mathematical computation capability, ideal for computer graphics and machine-learning tasks, it's role is specific, to put an image on a screen. The enhanced computational ability of a GPU can also be used to do high speed hash rates for such things as Bitcoin mining, it's made into a 'one trick pony'. To put it in the simplest terms a GPU is designed to be a fast number cruncher repeating the same task very fast whereas a CPU is more of a data organiser using many algorithms.

1. There is a difference between cold and frigid. There is plant life on Earth that can survive sub-zero temperatures even flowering plants - like Edelweiss for instance, it's likely the plant life on microTech has been adapted to do so even more.

You don't need constant minus 40 degrees to cool electronic hardware and it is also well to remember that soil surface temperatures receiving direct sunlight are not the same as deep soil temperatures without sunlight. I see no immersion breaking, it's perfectly possible that under-surface temperatures are sufficient for hardware cooling needs. In an internal environment fit for human habitation cooling below the dew point would be hazardous to electronics because of condensation... if you're going to extrapolate from current technology and Earth-based viewpoints.

2. They are well aware of the immersion breaking appearance of the hover mechanic for thrusters, where the issue lies is that those thrusters have to operate in space and on planetary surfaces. Real world physics is applied to thruster output it just looks unrealistic because of the limitations of inertia. If those thrusters were only capable of producing a few G's of thrust to make them seem believable planetside then coming to a halt in space after reaching speeds of thousands of metres per second would take many minutes, not seconds, to achieve. The thrusters are grossly overpowered for planetside use because they are tuned to give reasonable stopping distances in space. You can't have both (right now), you can't stop a ship in seconds with the same thrusters you expect to struggle to hold a ship up against 1G or less.

Master modes may seem immersion breaking until you take into account this problem of inertia at very high velocities - 1000 m/s is 2237 mph slowing from 1000m/s to zero in 15 seconds means you would be experiencing deceleration at a rate of 67 m/s equivalent to going from 150 mph to zero in 1 second, for 15 seconds. The more mass a ship has the more inertia it has relative to it's velocity. You wouldn't want realistic stopping times in this game, it's also unlikely you would want an Expanse style mechanic of needing to turn your ships ass toward whatever your destination was for a significant portion of it's travel to said destination.

There are those who say that having max velocities in space travel is immersion breaking, but is it? Modern aircraft have overspeed protection systems. The IFCS in Star Citizen performs the same function, you can never fully disable it while your ship is powered on because a part of it's design is not to exceed human body tolerances. If you could reach velocities of 100's of thousands of km/h it would take hours to slow down at survivable deceleration speeds and even a few degrees course correction at that speed would squash you flatter than a pancake against the ships hull, your neck would snap and your restraint harness would cut you in half first of course.

Even if they do go for absolute realism that doesn't solve the problem of the human body which couldn't survive deceleration from 1000+ m/s to 0 m/s in mere seconds even if the ship hull structure could. Star Trek handwavium for this problem of inertia at high velocities is solved by 'Inertial Dampeners', Master Mode is the handwavium required for Star Citizen to be tolerable and survivable at above space combat maneuvering cruise speeds. There's a good reason Kerbal Space Program is so hard for players to get into, and probably why they don't have human pilots.

4. Understanding the above explanation of inertia and thrust to weight ratio would make this point moot, of course ships with more mass are going to struggle in a gravity well compared to lower mass ships, and when cargo has mass this will be even more evident, there is such a thing as maximum thruster technology capability. It's just like jet engines today, there comes a point where jet engines just don't function, or are not feasible to manufacture, above a certain size. There is an efficiency cost benefit analysis to be made, for every extra thruster you need more power and more fuel so that in effect your ships is basically tending toward mostly thruster mass dotted all over the hull, battery / capacitors and fuel tank increase the mass further and because of all that extra mass you need more thrusters and so a limit is reached.

That's the point isn't it? The degree to which other game developers are willing to make their product as expansive.. and the OP is correct, there is no comparable game currently available that does what Cloud Imperium do to the same degree. Say what you will about Chris Roberts but he has forgotten more about the game industry than most keyboard-worriers will ever know and if he says there is no game he is aware of that has persistence to the same level I'd take his view over rando-salty-forumite anytime.

There are many games that have spaceships, but none have you able to get out of your seat and walk around your ship while it is in flight. Even fewer that have the ability to go and fix / replace necessary components in first person view. Soon™ you will be able to handle objects in your cockpit while flying. I'm not aware of any similar game that allows first person boarding action firefights without a cutscene / loading screen.

There are games that let you fly down to a planet surface from space under manual control without a loading screen, but they aren't first person as far as I'm aware, I'm not aware of any game that let's you manually load your ship with objects, and applies physics to any object in your ship not 'tied down'.

If anyone knows of one please tell me which game allows you to put a vehicle in a ship, inside another ship?.. let alone allows you to shoot a hand-held weapon from within that vehicle, through the first ship door through the containing ship door at another ship flying behind you.

Those who know what is 'standard' and those who know the technical hurdles most game developers won't even attempt have a better understanding of difficulty 'degree' when it comes to 'most games'.

Starfield is going to be good, of that I have no doubt, and it is nice to see a company of Bethesda's size move to the space game genre but make no bones about it even with all their resources and a fairly comparable development time frame you won't be able to do in Starfield what you can do in Star Citizen right now. Yes it is planned to have 100 star systems with their planets and moons, but the announcement also stated - it has only 4 player traversable cities with no current expectation they will add more - Star Citizen has that many cities in one star system.

Elite Dangerous is a good example, they have been in continual development for a similar length of time but they opted for a truncated 'get the product out' experience releasing a feature limited game in the expectation that it will expand and improve, but the law of diminishing returns applies, with each release that falls short they get fewer new players and more existing players leave choosing not to buy the addons.

I think this phenomenon factored into the decision making with No Mans Sky, if they hadn't released updates and addons free of charge to existing game owners we would likely have seen the same, a diminishing player base showcasing the game less and less to new prospects.

Part of the reason SC is popular among Youtubers and streamers, even the negative ones, is that there is always something to discuss, always something new to show off.. in a word.. for the streamer that means content that is always new and fresh. There is always the dream of things to come, anyone who discounts that is not being realistic about this project. The day SC is announced as finished that feature of the project begins to die and the sum toto of what is achieved has to stand on it's own merits in a competitive game industry that is not above copying the successes of other games. Bethesda will be banking on the notion that their game, without the hard stuff, will be enough for their fans and they are probably right. No-one in their right mind seriously suggests that because you play one game you can't play another especially if the buy-in price is no deterrent to having both. I actually think that Starfield will draw more new players to Star Citizen looking for a more expansive experience, just like Elite Dangerous and No Mans Sky has.

Few take into account back in 2012 space games without swords, magic and dragons were considered a poor investment by the 'suits' that decide what game you are going to play in the next cycle. If it hadn't been for the revival of franchises like Star Trek and Star Wars or the popularity of TV series like The Expanse, space games would likely still be a niche gaming experience. Even the advent of the billionaire race to space has likely had some impact on what futuristic visions of the gaming industry corporate developers have, once they find a formula that works they stick to it no matter how many versions of Mass Effect there are you won't be landing the Normandy on a free roam planet, you won't be taking it's shuttle planetside without a cutscene. Why bother? The fans don't expect it anyway and they'll still pay for more of the same. GTA despite all it's iterations and billions of dollars in revenue is still basically the same game it was at first release. Is there anyone daring to suggest that GTA 6 will / should feature an international crime syndicate multi-city game experience? Why not? Do you think the fans of the game wouldn't go crazy for that?

Star Citizen solely relies on players showcasing existing features and discussing upcoming features. Knowing ahead of time that your minimum game package will allow you all the future expansions and improvements does change the paradigm. The furore over NMS's release was in part due to the players expectation that addons and improvements would likely be paid future expansions. They still don't have the expectation that many features already in and coming to Star Citizen will ever be contemplated for NMS, Sony could pull the plug at any time and there would be nothing that the NMS player base could do about it.

Frontier Developments ceased future development for console players, and judging by the player numbers they are experiencing since Odyssey it's hard to see them making great strides in the future of ED it has had a decent run but it is coming to end of life, they announced last year on their corporate site that they are starting a whole new game franchise so it's likely that will be their focus going forward, contrast that with the understanding that Cloud Imperium is a one franchise company and will be for many years to come.

In a recent interview Todd Howard acknowledged that their experience with Skyrim V changed their view of long term development for games that last for decades, something this project started out with, few investors are interested in such long term returns they aren't interested in years of in-house R&D to bring a product to market. 'Good enough to sell at a profit in the short to medium term' (then rely on the dedication and enthusiasm of the players / modders for years of continual returns) is their paradigm. What the short-sighted decryers of this project can't or won't admit is that years of hard fought for improvement and iteration is the greatest driver of success for Star Citizen. It's not static, it's going somewhere they, in increasing numbers, want to go in the future and that is the killer feature no other game franchise has or is likely to have in the near future.

I think the main operator in the post you are replying to is 'If', asking a question is not a statement of future intent... no-one suggests they will do what he is mooting not even the post you are replying to.

There is a difference between multiplayer and cooperative play - which isn't made explicit in the video you link.

Waiting around for groups to assemble may appeal to only a certain type of player, but this isn't necessary in a solo log-in find a player willing to cooperatively play on a limited time basis scenario. Star Citizen has this feature, you can choose to cooperate at any time with whoever is already logged in. No waiting.

Those who wish to take advantage of organised group play can and those who only want play solo but in a cooperative manner can too. We see it frequently even in current builds and generally it is seen as a positive experience by those who engage in it. I'm a mainly solo player who never plays MMO's but I do engage in cooperative play in SC from time to time, having the choice is the feature that elevates Star Citizen above the standard type MMO.

You're most welcome, I hope you have success in your efforts.

Procedural generation refers to any method of asset creation that doesn't involve hand sculpting, which is long and dev time expensive. Using greyscale images to offset faces from a flat 3D mesh has been in use for many years. First you choose the mesh grid according to the detail level you require, this basically is selecting the number of rows and columns, it's called subdividing.

Next you take a greyscale image and using the 0 - 255 pixel values from black to white apply that as the multiplier to the height above the base mesh - this is why they are commonly referred to as height maps. You can get greyscale imagery from radar terrain mapping if you want to take from real world terrain examples. This is called a 'displacement modifier'.

The limitation of height map displacement was that the height values are calculated on the GPU for the visual representation but the collision physics etc were calculated on the original non-transformed mesh. This is why you can see someone walking on terrain and they sink into the ground.

To retain the heightmap information for a 3D model you would need to 'bake' the heightmap displacement data into a transformed 3Dmesh, this produces a higher detail mesh according to the number of times you subdivide the mesh and the number of pixels on your terrain bitmap, once you bake in the calculated values a new 3D mesh is created and the flat mesh is discarded, now your terrain mesh has collision physics and topography.

Evo Herzeg did work on this problem and has managed to create a system that works in engine where the GPU heightmap calculations are passed back to the CPU for collision physics to take place.

For years heightmaps were used to make simple 3D models appear more complex by the same method, commonly referred to as nurnies or greebles, this method was developed because game engines had polygon limits which made the game models look simplistic or brought frame rates to a crawl if they were overly detailed. Other advancements also allowed RGB bitmaps to inform lighting of the model. This became known as PBR - Physically Based Rendering (this is a very simplified explanation of PBR but it covers the basics for our purposes here).

EDIT as an aside CI are further advancing heightmaps from simple grey scale to allow something that GS heightmaps don't - displacement in 3 dimensions rather than just height. You can't get overhangs with simple GS heightmaps, but they will be able to do it with RGB heightmaps.

The game developers at Cloud Imperium use both methods, they use heightmaps (with extended functionality) to create 3D models of planets from smooth spheres without the need for 3D modellers to hand craft a whole area. These are baked into the final models which are not full detail as yet, that final stage of added detail is done in the game engine using PBR.

There are many 3D modeller programs you can use this heightmap technique on - the 2 that I have used are blender and DAZ3D, although DAZ3D doesn't allow the 'baking in' it does allow the visual representation of heightmaps.

Unreal Engine can import Photogrammetry once it has been converted to an FBX file, you can do this online it renders the pixels of the textures applied to the base model rather than the base mesh (again very simplified), you could see this as an evolution of PBR - they call this Nanite.

Photogrammetry does not use heightmaps, it uses AI to calculate the relative dimensions of an object photographed from multiple angles based upon pixel shading. Of course you an use all 3 methods in UE, but to make a 3D model you'll need an external app for that.

Hope that helps.

Valentines day 14th February 2016 was the first time that Squadron 42 and Star Citizen packs were sold separately.

Until the pack split in Q1 of 2016 every $45 game package included both Squadron 42 and the PU.

They are both the same game, everything for Squadron 42 will come to the PU. In fact the argument is more valid for someone who 'only wanted' Squadron 42, why should they fund content to go to the PU? why should people who don't pay $100's of dollars for a ship get access to them in the game anyway? Why should subscribers pay so that CI can make community content that non-subscribers don't have to pay for, why should non-subscribers or non-Concierge get access to armour, clothes, flight suits and weapons - even later ships - that are supposed to be rewards for supporting the project above and beyond?

It's all one project, anyone who thinks there is a difference between the PU and Squadron 42 is simply mis-informed. "Squadron 42 is basically one giant dynamic mission inside the game universe" - Jared Huckaby. Is it your contention that if I never played the Siege of Orison then I shouldn't pay for that part? What if I never went to Orison at all? Why should I pay to have bunkers and bunker missions made? I've never been in one.

Cloud Imperium are not in the business of dumping spoilers into a small testbed pre-release for the sake of it, if testing is better done in Squadron 42 they'll do it there before bringing it to the PU - Master Mode and the new EVA for example. If they have one iteration of something already in the PU there is no need to add more for no obvious reason, it won't speed testing up and it won't speed the overall project up either. The servers have been running at maximum capacity for years content additions only allowed by improvements in the game code and engine - PES and server meshing is about to change that, and we're still in the testing phase for both.

It's a confusion many seem to have, that Cloud Imperium have partially released a game and are just dragging their feet about content additions for the sake of it, that somehow the idea is that the project is simply here to make the fans happy on a quarterly basis. That isn't the way it is at all. People say it is a tech demo, it isn't that either. A tech demo has no definite end goal and long term plan of how to achieve that goal.

There is a vision for the final game and to achieve that vision many pieces have to come together. While those pieces come together we are allowed to play the game AS TESTERS of those limited pieces so that the next piece and the next piece can go in.

The argument that it is taking too long is a spurious one, no-one knows how long it SHOULD take, many people, including those offering advice don't really have much of a clue what the overall plan for the final game is anyway.

If you don't want to test an Alpha there are plenty of other things to do in life, there are plenty of other games. We are given caveats and warnings at every interaction with the company and the Alpha, just because people don't pay them any heed doesn't man they weren't warned about the nature of the project. To address the point about menu screen choosing of which star system to enter, it is not Cloud Imperium's intent to simply drop in content you can rubber-neck around for a few weeks only to get bored and start asking for the next content drop, and the next. We don't need new rocky planets to test, we already have enough examples in the Alpha to test those. They have a reason to be in the game beyond engaging the easily bored.

Easy can be done quickly, but no-one asked for easy. Hard things take a little longer and the seemingly impossible take a hell of a lot longer than people expect.

There is no point suggesting changes to the fundamentals while the game is only partially complete. We don't have armour yet, and there are changes which can be made to affect ballistics velocity and penetration. You've taken one aspect of weapon and ship balancing in a partially made game and extrapolated from that point.. when it isn't the end point.

Can you ask? Sure... you can also ask for anything you like - Strawberry Sundae planet with chocolate sauce ice caps - doesn't mean it is likely to be considered. It has to fit the lore of the game and currently there is no lore that explains how shields would completely stop ballistic projectiles.

This goes against what Chris said about shields from the earliest days. It has always been his intention that shields would only reduce the kinetic energy of ballistic projectiles.

What you are suggesting is a simplistic answer for a complex game.

First it's an unfinished alpha, yes people don't like to hear that, but it is.

Second the game already has ways to avoid contact with other players, if you choose not to use them that is up to you. Your choices have consequences which is an intended part of the game.

Third, there are mechanisms coming which will make life difficult for those who choose to randomly attack lawful players and NPC's. There won't be any profit for it, and worse there will be increasingly severe consequences for it. There is no PvP slider in the real world, the reason we don't normally see people attacking each other on sight is because the benefits of that don't outweigh the consequences.

Fourth, the game right now is small, even the Stanton system isn't finished it wil be bigger in the future not only in size but with more things to do in the existing spaces. There those who laugh at the idea that NPC security will affect their actions but that is because they see them as they are now, at the frequency they are now. They also have an 'easy out' of choosing a lawless lifestyle - this won't be the case in the future.

Things are going to chance, and things will be more balanced out. No-one wants simplistic answers, especially to problems that will go away all by themselves as the game is proceeds to a more complete state.

They won't, the spaces are designed so that viewing from one space into another space is kept to a minimum. The players looking out of the spaceport window can't see the interior of a Javelin. The people on the Javelin can't see the interior of the spaceport. It's a hard notion to wrap your head around that the exterior of a ship can be on one DGS and the interior of that same ship can be on another DGS, but that is how it's done.

At the extreme they can be on their own server and they will be persisted from the time they exit QT to the time they enter QT. You have to get in an elevator from the docking port up to the space station interior so the space station is one server while the ship (and the docking arm and lobby) is on another server, or the DGS to DGS transfer can take place in the airlock

Yes, that limit exists, but it's not in the 1000 range, it's higher than that.. and even piled close together 10,000's of objects cover a wide area so occlusion culling, off-screen culling, ship interior culling and LOD's do factor in to what is feasible.

Seamless transfer of players and NPC's would be visible if not carried out in areas was where no-one can see them. Which is why they are doing away with open pads where ships de-spawn and switching to enclosed hangars. Port Olisar was designed before the requirements of server meshing transfer between DGS's and Shards was known, it has no elevators and hangars

Sharding is not ultimately due to the limits of server meshing, it is due to the real world signal travel time between regional centres. Ping time if you will. There will be regional shards for a long time to come which has nothing to do with Cloud Imperium game design.

Why do you think that? If all you are rendering is one space station and the medium distant LOD for a planet there's no reason that either your PC or the server can't handle that 1000 player load. There is such things as occlusion culling... it's very unlikely you'll have direct line of sight to every single player and every item they are wearing / holding. So yes, the game will decide who can see what and remove what isn't visible.

Yes they will be visible if they are on the same shard, and which shard you all go to is determined by match logc as much as is practicable.

The game spaces inside structures are not big enough to hold a 1000 players all in the same volume in line of sight of each other except on planet / moon surfaces or in space, and any places that perhaps could will have traffic flow management to reduce that possibility. In which case things like ship interior culling, building interior culling and LOD's comes into play to reduce workload on the client PC.

I did say Port Olisar was a bad example, it hasn't been designed for server meshing, the more up-to-date space stations have which is why they have elevators.

3. The seamless transition between DGS's and shards.

This is required because if you broke the game space into smaller and smaller areas, without meshing you would have what other games have, a cutscene transfer every time you moved from area to area.
The amount of players in a small game area is limited by the volume that area has, you just couldn't get 1000 players into a small corridor, a bar or a shop but let's say they are all mad keen to go to that place at the same time. In order to get to the place they have to pass through these traffic managed choke points and those DGS to DGS / shard to shard 'transfer possible' limited spaces like elevators.

The process works the same for both DGS to DGS transfer and shard to shard transfer, shard to shard may take a little longer.

There is 1000 players milling about in TEASA Spaceport between the train platform and the lobby area where the elevators go to the hangars - there are 8 elevators each can take 10 players to a hangar, which means the they can take away up to 80 players at a time. Players are coming in on trains and leaving via the hangars. Max capacity for that DGS on EU Shard 001 holding TEASA Spaceport has been reached. Remember that DGs isn't holding any other part of the game universe, only the area from the tunnel before TEASA Spaceport to the hangar elevators is in that servers RAM, it can sealiy hold 1000 players on foot in that area.

The system has predicted ahead of time that there are too many players coming in on trains to TEASA Spaceport on EU Shard 001, so trains entering tunnels with 50 players on each are duplicated to a newly spun up EU Shard 002 that holds the game space from the tunnel exit just before the TEASA Spaceport platform to the exit from TEASA Spaceport via the hangars, there are now two shards holding TEASA Spaceport.

All the players on a train carriage and the train carriage itself are momentarily duplicated to both Shard 001 and Shard 002, you see all the other players in the carriage on Shard 001, they are looking and behaving exactly the same on Shard 002 because all the data and control inputs sent to both shards are the same,this only happens for a few seconds at most while the train is in the tunnel.

All I have to now is kill the train carriage on Shard 001 and let the train carriage on Shard 002 (with your identical copies) continue out of the tunnel to the now much quieter TEASA Spaceport. I've also reduced the numbers of players entering TEASA Spaceport on Shard 001, because they were the evil copies of the 50 players and I killed them! There are many trains going through tunnels in Lorville, I can do this shard to shard duplicate/kill transfer as many times as I like to manage traffic flow. No player saw it happen because they could only see the players in the train carriage they were on while in that tunnel, they certainly can't see 1000 other players on that train.

You say.. but I was in one train while my buddy was on another train but we both want to go to the same ship hangar at TEASA Spaceport, he's on Shard 001 and I'm on Shard 002 now so we can't see each other or interact! What happens then is that now that Shard 001 has been de-populated somewhat, when you get into the elevator to go to the hangar, that elevator sets off on Shard 002, but it arrives back on Shard 001 to the hangar you chose by exactly the same process as you left Shard 001, you have no idea that you transferred twice between shards. When the player numbers pressure on Shard 001 reduces, Shard 002 can transfer all it's occupants back to Shard 001 and be spun done completely, it may have been up for only 20 minutes and it only ever had authority for that small section of TEASA Spaceport.

2. Managing the Game Space and traffic control measures.

The game space is broken up into areas that are very small, much smaller than people realise. Some think that the smallest area that has to go on a DGS is a planet or moon, but a planet or moon could be spread over hundreds of DGS's, and there would be no overlap of authority between those DGS's. A landing zone like Orison could be spread over 30 - 40 DGS's (or more!) each holding 500 or more players (that could be 20,000 players in one landing zone). Remember only one DGS in a shard is allowed to write it's change state information to the Entity Graph for a given area.

How do you break a landing zone into 30 or 40 areas? What you need is a time when players are in a confined area for up to a few seconds, without any external view from the small space they are in so they couldn't see 1000 other players even if they wanted to while they are in that confined space - an elevator, a store, a bar, a space station, a train carriage in a tunnel would suit our purpose.

The commonest question is 'How can they possibly put 1000's of players in an area within sight of each other, and the answer is, they won't because they don't need to. Again the common response is 'What if the players all go there how could they stop them all being in the same place at the same time!'. If you drive a car you already know the answer to that, you just haven't transferred that understanding to the game.

You have a car with 4 seats, 4 people at maximum capacity. you want to drive into town it's the busiest part of the day on the weekend lot's of other cars with 4 people in are going into town. How could you stop the town centre from becoming overloaded? You manage the traffic flow, you have traffic lights slow down groups of cars and let them through only as enough people leave the town centre so that on average the outflow matches the inflow.

In the game these checkpoints (traffic light equivalents) are orbital security, ATC, hangar access and guards, elevators, guarded access ways you have to pass through all designed to slow down progress and manage inflow / outflow to an area. The game system can predict ahead if the volume of traffic is heading in a direction and make changes - like ordering guards at access points to start scanning players more frequently. Thius is exactly the same way they do it in an airport... they manage how many planes are landing per hour and how fast people entering the airport get through the airport to the gates. Unlike the real world the game can, and will take any excess overflow and transfer them to a whole new shard, even temporarily. How can that work?

That is not how it works anyone who is on your shard close enough to be visible to you will be visible to you. You'll be on the same Dedicated Game Server (DGS) on the same shard.

Port Olisar is good for an example but not in practise which is why it will be going away, it is split into 4 landing area struts. 250 players per strut = 1000. That's only about double the players in a shard / DGS right now and current DGS's hold the whole of the Stanton system as well as Port Olisar.

There are 3 principles someone needs to understand to grasp what the plan for Star Citizen is going to become.

1. State change database and areas of authority.
Only one DGS can have authority over a defined area of the game space on a shard, but that defined area could be as small as a single room, or it could be as big as the whole game itself. Players on one shard cannot see or feel the effects of players or events on other shards (some information is exchanged between shards but it is limited).

If you have a base state for entity's (anything from a solar system, to a planet, to a cup) in the game then you only need to keep one copy of that entity in it's pristine state, this is why it is called the Replication Layer, because it replicates (copying), the pristine centrally stored copy of the world down to individual DGS's. When a server is spun up the data from the base state repository (Replication Layer Gateway Service) is written to the hard drive of the server, this is the way it was without PES. Every server had an identical copy of the Stanton system when it launched, fed only by player items - which are kept on a separate database. Once this process has completed the players can now enter that server shard.

Now with PES and Entity Graph you have the server loaded with the base state items for only a small part of the game world then you query the persistence database which only holds the details of any changes made to those base state items in that small area - and apply those changes example: location, orientation, damage state etc. Now before any player lands on a server it looks unique because change state information for that specific shard has been applied.

Change state for all entity's on a shard are constantly being written to, and read from the Entity Graph database. This is why there can't be more than one DGS with the same area of authority in the game shard, because conflicting information about the game zones condition would be written to the Entity Graph. You won't see 'invisible happenings' because to be in an area visible to you and other players you HAVE TO BE on the same DGS on a shard.

Again, to make it clear. There can only be one DGS that has authority over a given area in the game shard at any one time. There will not be two Port Olisar's on a shard. The way they populate a shard is by making each DGS's area of authority (in the game space) gradually less and less large. Let's say a DGS is holding a planet and it's moons, players are coming into that planetary system and that DGS is getting full - so while some players coming in are in QT travel 4 more DGS's are spun up on a new shard and the moons and planets now each go on their own separate server, as the shard with the overcrowded moon and planet is de-populated it is spun down.

There you go! you're getting it. There could be thousands of Dedicated Game Servers per shard and there could be dozens of DGS's for just one landing zone on a shard.

I've seen people talk about instances (copies) of locations within a shard. This is not particularly efficient, there's no need to instance within a shard if you can have as many shards as you wish and a single location Dedicated Game Server in a shard is no more 'expensive' system-wise per player than a multiple DGS Shard. We have single DGS shards now. There's no point in having 2 Lorvilles on one shard when I can have 2 Lorvilles on 2 shards for the same cost.

The main part of 'meshing' from the players perspective is the change from having to menu log into a location on a Dedicated Game Server to being able to seamlessly transition between DGS's. If it takes a few seconds to transfer a small group of players between DGS's where in the game are players limited to twiddling their thumbs for multiple seconds in a volume limited enclosed space? There's some other fancy services that run in the background designed to make intelligent and best use of those player transitions.

Your example about Lorville. Let's say 1000 players do decide to go there, can 1000 players fit in the same space all within sight of each other - not really. You can't get 1000 players into one elevator, there's only one way out of the hangar. Lorville is broken into areas, have you noticed all the twisty corridors where you can't see around the next corner? The sheer number of elevators! Think of all the separate areas in Lorville you can't get to without a train or an elevator, they can all be on their own Dedicated Game Server on a shard, it's not like one DGS for Lorville it could be up to 30 or 40 DGS's (each holding up to say.. 500 players) on the same shard with no area duplication. The train ride between all the gates and TEASA Spaceport? They are there partly to allow server meshing transitions to be less visible. Commuter Citizen was never about time sinks, it was about planning ahead to server meshing.

Let's say you land at Lorville, there's a crowd of 100 players milling about the area in the lobby of the Spaceport, the rest are spread out around Lorville, hab area, social / shopping area, hospital, 6 gates, business district.. (and more to come) and each of those locations are on their own DGS - you enter a new DGS via a train or an elevator and you leave that area to go to a new DGS area via a train or an elevator.

Those 100 players in the spaceport are making the system look for ways to offload some of the weight for new players to come into the spaceport, so as those players get on a train, 50 on one train 50 on another, they can't see inside a train they aren't on, so one train stays in the current shard and the other train is sent to another newly spun up shard. You can do this multiple times in the same time frame (I'm trying avoid using the word instant to avoid confusion), all the trains running around Lorville split and now you have reduced the population size of the shard, by shifting 50% of the population to a new shard while they were on a train in a black tunnel. As far as DGS transitions and shard transitions is concerned, trains (particularly in tunnels) and elevators are the same thing an opportunity to transfer players around as required either between DGS controlled spaces within the game or even between shards. That's why there are so damn many elevators and no stairs.

The system knows who your friends are, it knows if there was someone you were supposed to see and so it puts you on the shard where they are, and it moves all your 'stuff' to the shard you are on. All the other bodies who were at the Spaceport with you, if they have no reason to be on your shard you won't even notice they aren't with you anymore... you just think.. Oh, the other train occupants must have gone to other stations even if you were stood at the window you wouldn't know that train behind yours blinked out of existence in a black tunnel, it's not so crowded at the business district as it was at TEASA Spaceport. So if you are thinking about how can they split areas out to different DGS servers, or how can they hide transitions to other shards - think: train or elevator. Anywhere where the numbers of players are limited by space and they have to spend some time in them is where those transitions will occur.

Has anyone noted that the majority of security stop and searches go on around POI access points? When NPC activity is increased this is likely to be more so. There are those who want risk eliminated, but this is probably because they have an inflated view of risk and don't take into account risk reduction strategies.

How you navigate to those unavoidable POI's requires some 'out of the box' thinking. I think it was Sun Tsu who said that if you have 100 miles to go to a battle make sure the journey is made by the enemy, if you can achieve your goal by making that 100 mile journey into a 1000 mile journey with affordable cost to you, so much the better. There might be more efficient use of cooperating forces that reduces risk both to the defenders, which is a factor they will take into account, and to those who feel that standard techniques leave them open to being vulnerable. Anyone who doesn't do a cost benefit analysis of their choices is going to struggle to make any headway for long. Patience has it's own reward.

The OP in another thread has revealed that he is open to using the design of the system (beacons) to his advantage, it shouldn't come as a surprise that others can do the same with other aspects of the system. In the mind of the attackers they inherently think that confrontation is unavoidable and consequences are negligible they see every target as a juicy pay-off and themselves as virtually invincible. They see themselves as in place in every scenario without necessarily thinking how that occurs or what it would cost to achieve that, also traps (or subterfuge) that can be used for one can also be used for the other. Not all potential 'victims' will be dumb schmucks.

In the scenario of attacking a fully loaded Hull E going about it's lawful business there comes a point where there is a role reversal the attackers become loaders and haulers (otherwise what's the point?) and they don't have the protection of the system. The Hull E had ship insurance and cargo insurance, he's lost time. The ones hauling contraband have to get through all the checkpoints to a place where they can sell an uninsurable cargo, a place that will be known to bounty hunters, local security and even Advocacy. There is no reason to think that the security will be as pitiful as it is now. A certain percentage of that cargo will not get through and so the cost benefit analysis has to be made, is it worth it in the final analysis?

The current Stanton system is a goldfish bowl, it isn't yet as big as it's going to be and careful placement of future access points to trade can make big changes.

One of my favourite aspects of what is to come is that the game will be designed / is being designed (on balance) to reward the smartest, not the necessarily the strongest.

...and people say they don't listen to the community.

There is a reason for both scouts and escorts, and if it pays there are those who might want to specialise in escorting so that the assumption only org mates will perform that task is short-sighted. They don't have to ultimately protect the cargo ship all alone, they only need to make the TTK long enough so that help can be called for. Scouts alone, though very valuable, don't work if you're pulled out of QT.

You pre-suppose the escorts won't have any ability or strategy to deal with attackers, that's hubris. I certainly don't accept the premise that you are already dead if a group of miscreants turns up, as usual it ignores any strategy people can use in that scenario. Just because you can't think of one, or other games you play don't allow for one, doesn't mean it doesn't exist.

EVE Online is only superficially like Star Citizen there is no first person physicality in EVE it has no facility react other than by choosing from menus once you are in a 'situation' you are locked into it, this isn't the case with Star Citizen. There is no DCS style combat play in EVE and there certainly is no first person gun play aboard ships, continuing the tired old argument that it is the same won't get anyone anywhere.

What has that got to do with it? The work was done by Cloud Imperium employees for that specific purpose, whether they finished it or not. It has a function and it has to be in place for the Replication Layer Gateway Service to work with Server Meshing.

Are you suggesting work is planned and allocated and none is done? Perhaps you might want to evaluate whether your reasoning is purely governed by FUD-ster talking points?

I didn't miss it, I stated it explicitly - Entity Zones are nested within Object Containers. That still does not equate to... "...the fact 10 people in proximity to each other as when they are fighting require exponentially higher amounts of servers"... which is just nonsense. Am I surprised you selectively read what I wrote? No, not in the slightest.

The only part that might confuse some is that Chris uses the term Entity Zones in his Letter in place of Object Containers, once you realise that it's clear nothing has changed from the original plan. The hierarchical structure is still governed by the amount of players in a game region. Server Object Container streaming is still in effect.

The current build requires that all data for the Stanton system has to be written to the server, which has a max storage capacity and those data transfers to the server hard drive cost network bandwidth, with server meshing backed by Entity Graph those data writes are reduced to only those zones the players are currently using, thus saving cost.The Atlas Component Service (It's on the Progress Tracker) manages these data writes to Dedicated Game Servers.

The idea that ten players within fighting range of each other being on separated servers is just preposterous, what possible reason would there be to write the data for the same game zone to many servers if you don't have to? Why would they allocate network engineers for 62 weeks to make a service that is specifically designed to avoid that? Static Server Meshing breaks the game space into separated zones which have fixed boundaries of authority, the reason PES and Entity Graph was required before meshed servers is so that any unused zones can be spun down and then spun up in the exact same state they were last used so that only the zones the players are using needed to be loaded onto Dedicated Game Servers. The whole point of seamlessly meshed servers is to make more efficient use of servers with respect to player activity, stage one statically meshed servers is more efficient than standalone (which is what we have now) but not as efficient as dynamically meshed servers.

If your proposition is that they would go from one working system where a server can hold 100+ players to an exponentially less efficient system where servers can hold less than 10, after years of work and cost to change it, then you clearly have no idea what is planned. Any reasonable person would think to themselves, that can't be right, I must have misunderstood it... unless of course your agenda is permanently skewed by 'CIG bad'.

The assumption this woefully uninformed low effort at FUD OP is making is that no work has been done on the Replication Layer services as yet. A quick check of the Progress Tracker - Deliverables shows that work has been done on it.

Atlas - 62 weeks work completed - Add functionality to the Hybrid for what will become the Atlas component service of the Replication Layer. Atlas functionality splits the game up into multiple manageble (sic) regions (known as territories) which are then provided to the Replicant functions Dedicated Game Servers (DGS) by the Replicant Hybrid to manage and simulate.

Hybrid Service - 41 weeks work completed - Moves the network code's Replication Layer out of the Dedicated Game Server (DGS) and into a stand-alone service. This service is referred to as the Hybrid, as later versions of Server Meshing will split it into component services handling different aspects of the Replication Layer's functionality. The first version of Server Meshing will use the Hybrid service to manage client and server streaming, replication of networked state between clients and servers, and persisting state changes to the EntityGraph.

Replicated Entity Spawn Params From Network - 6 weeks work completed - Entity spawn parameters are a data record describing how to spawn a given entity. Previously these would be obtained from game code on the server and sent via the network to spawn entities on clients. This work pushes the necessary data into the network code'sReplication Layer so it can create entity spawn parameters independently of other systems.

Replication Layer Entity Authority - 73 weeks work completed - Moves the code that handles assigning and enforcing entity authority into the Replication Layer.

Server Streaming - 11 weeks work completed - Changes the implementation of Server Object Container Streaming (S-OCS) to be driven from the network code's Replication Layer, backed by EntityGraph for persistent storage.

Shard Replication Layer Population - 6 weeks work completed - Each Shard contains a complete independent copy of the game universe and its entity hierarchy. EntityGraph is the database providing persistent cloud storage for entities in the Shards and inventories. This work populates the Replication Layer for a Shard's server from the EntityGraph and allows changes to the persistent state to be written back.

StarHash Bind Culling - 5 weeks work completed - Bind Culling decides what entities are "bound" (network replicated) to which clients. Previously, the server would use the Entity Component Update Scheduler (ECUS) to determine visibility of entities for each client. This work introduces a StarHash maintained by the network code's Replication Layer to perform the same role. The StarHash is a data structure optimized for spatial queries, such as "what can this client see?"

Cue the detail devoid sarcasm that doesn't address the information given... clearly identifying we have a troll.

Are you capable of putting your scathing negative vitriol aside for just long enough to discuss the subject at hand?

IN 2017 they announced that an outside weather company app (on Android iirc) had the planets and moons of Star Citizen and it was stated that real time weather would be available through 3rd party apps. Also the web platform is being tied into the in game Spectrum so that those who can scrape data from websites could also use that data. Spectrum will be available on screens inside the game.

The assumption that only what has been shown is all they have worked on is plain wrong. In the Chairmans Letter Chris actually says some things for Squadron 42 will be put into the game over the next year.. and of course there are star systems in Squadron 42 which will come to the PU after it's release.

You are very obviously confused, but I am fascinated to discover where you got such a preposterous idea. I read the Chairmans Letter and it doesn't suggest any such thing.

Why don't we start from 'Entity Zones' are nested within object containers which are hosted on their own servers in hierarchical order according to the player population present in them and proceed from there? It might make things a little clearer for you.

Daily rentals are cheap and easy to get, even with a basic Mustang and Aurora. You can make 50 - 100K / hr easily just looting outposts.

You can get spectacles, laser eye surgery and even lens replacement now!

Even when it is stated 'on the record' for permanent referral denialism is still rampant. He stated clearly 1.8 million. 70% conversion of the 840+K new accounts in 2022 to paying accounts, that's 600K game packages. Who cares, it's all money in the pot.

I guess the requirement to open a whole new Asiatic region is just those whales with dozen's of dupe accounts going on holiday or using VPN's? PC Hardware is so cheap now millions of people can multi-box accounting for the rise in Monthly Active Users? /s

OMG something serious must have happened! The perma-negative trolls are out in force this weekend!

To be fair there is a line in the dialogue stating it was very unusual behaviour.

They (Clive Johnson iirc) have discussed some ideas but it's far down the road.

'Unavoidable' is such a final term, not for the foreseeable future might be more appropriate.

There will be regional shards for quite a long time to come but that is more about real world signal travel time and bandwidth limits than any limits of CI's system... real world technological advances may answer that before CI needs to.

There's some very interesting work going on with fibre optics that may, probably, increase bandwidth (and reduce the number of required repeater stations on submerged cabling) by several orders of magnitude. It involves using different wavelengths of light to carry signals, each wavelength can carry the same amount of data that traditional white light adapters can. Those multiple inputs are joined using prisms to make white light which goes down the cable, at the other end the light is split again into it's constituent wavelengths to read each signal individually, apparently they are trialling a device to do this which is the size of a matchbox, they are scalable in series, so a matchbox that has 10 wavelengths can be put in series with 9 other matchboxes to make 100 times the bandwidth, and so on. Previously interference made this infeasible, but now there may be a way to overcome that (way above my pay grade to explain!). Ground stations equipped with multi-wavelength fibre optics linked to satellites may also reduce signal travel time considerably.

The subject has been flogged to death and this post (intentionally? probably) doesn't add any more information to the discussion of it.

Squadron 42 will have appeal to many gamers who don't want an MMO experience, there are many who are just waiting to see.

There are many players who will be excited to get features like base building and a functioning AI population coupled with AI passenger services that allows immersive roleplay without the need to own and fly ships. Some who see this game as merely ship pew pew will change their view.

The work has been paid for and done, there are no investors to pay off - the small investors CIG have taken on will likely take their cuts from licensing of merchandise (it is what they were brought on board for). There hasn't been any merchandising at all yet,and Squadron 42 will leverage that income. As I've often pointed out LucasArts made 90% of their funding from merchandising. Don't discount the pulling power of some big name personalities, which CI hasn't used at all yet. It's also worth pointing out that the majority work and assets for continuing the Squadron 42 franchise have already been made, and the infrastructure (offices and facilities) have been paid for.

The idea that a slowdown would curtail development also doesn't take into account that Cloud Imperium have intellectual property assets they can leverage for loans if it came to it, but that would be in extremis. If there are 1.5+ million players then they would only need to raise around $80 per year from each to raise $120 Million. That's only $6.60 per month if they don't recruit a single new backer - how likely is that given the improvements in the game, even with a world economy slowdown peoples appetite for entertainment generally bucks the trend. It has been a record couple of years for the entertainment industry as a whole despite inflation and world events.

Not sure where someone got the idea that they are recruiting only 100K new players per year the Citizen increase was 868485 since this day last year and they got 36,000 new accounts on only 1 day of this years IAE. There are people who have multiple paying accounts but we are a tiny minority, very few in the existing community know why it would be worth having multiple accounts. Do the math, if 10% of the existing backers made new accounts to account for the increase they would all have had to made an on average extra 6 accounts each over the last year. There's no realistic reason that accounts for that level of duplicates.

What is also assumed is that sales are the driver for increased uptake, this is only because in game events tend to coincide with sales. When you watch viewer figures and new people coming to Reddit and these forums, and new people coming to stream the game you see there are new people coming in, even while it is in an unfinished alpha state.

The evidence is still strongly suggestive that the majority funding comes from new accounts, not existing high spenders, the figure Chris gave was for up to end of Q1 this year. This is a talking point those who push the 'defund CIG to get it sooner' FUD-spreaders have been pushing for years. It will not make the development go faster, it would slow it down.

There are more features coming to the game over the next year than simply PES and Server Meshing. There are still dynamic events listed as ongoing on the Progress Tracker well into next year.

The vast majority of people who have bought a game package don't visit these forums. This fact tends to skew peoples perceptions.

It's coming to the game, it's called 'Jobwell' you can find those boards (just placeholder stuff right now) in the TDD.

Many years ago I played Freespace for hundreds, if not thousands of hours, we would talk on the modding forums about how amazing it would be to see inside the ships and be able to see their interiors when they broke apart. I don't ever remember anyone suggest anything as radical as being able to walk around inside ships, or put vehicles and ships inside other ships. That was probably a dream too far back then. There aren't that many games that offer those possibilities today.

When you consider that Witcher 3 has just had a serious quality update and they currently have 6.8K viewers and Minecraft has 14.8K viewers then 30K viewers for an unfinished alpha is not to be sniffed at.

There are some game streamers who have had millions of views for their Star Citizen videos.

Let's take an analogy, just for a very rough example.

You are the person in charge of a National Park nature reserve. You have a group of staff and a budget. Someone comes up with a fantastic idea that all visitors to the park come with WiFi equipped cameras and they are constantly taking pictures, a lot of bird watchers!

So you ask an IT engineer, if we get the visitors to upload their pictures to our database can we use them to make a hyper-accurate population count of the number and types of birds we have in our park?

IT guy: We can set up the image database and network to collect the images then train an AI to recognise landscape features in the images and locate the position the photographer was in at the time the picture was taken to with 1 metre, all dated to the second.

Park Ranger: Great! How much will that cost and how long do you think it take?

IT Guy: Oh.. it will take about 10 engineers a year plus the cost of network and hardware - about 500 million dollars.

Park Ranger: Great! that's in our budget! Get started!

IT Guy: There is a problem.

Park Ranger: Oh, what's the problem?

IT Guy: There are two parts to what you are asking, you also want a system that will identify 'what is a bird' so that they can be counted.

Park Ranger: So how long would that take and how much?

IT Guy: We have to build a server farm, get a group of highly trained expensive AI research graduate guys to train an AI to go through all the images and recognise 'what is a bird' under any lighting conditions from any angle (birds are very good at camouflage!), or recruit and train about 500 ornithologists to go through every image manually and do a bird count - About 10 billion dollars and 5 years for the AI training. You have an average 10 million visitors per year taking about 20 images per visitor for the database so perhaps half that, 5 Billion dollars, to recruit and train 500 ornithologists, who will take about 15 years to go through one years worth of images. What is the average lifespan and breeding cycle of the birds in your park?

It seems simple to us to recognise a bird in a picture, the question is how do you train an AI to do it as efficiently or preferably several orders of magnitude much better to track bird populations in real time so that the information is current and useable, and cost effective?

Putting in a system to sell ships, especially since it's effects would be wiped periodically, might seem simple but it would be open to widespread abuse and so it would skew any analytical data they are collecting toward devising the final economic system, making it unusable. The argument that it would disrupt their fund raising is not valid, we already have non-monetary ways to obtain ships, you can just rent them - which you could see as temporary ownership. There are better ways to use their time and resources until ship selling becomes a valid proposition. The game is still being built, piece by piece. We are playtesting an alpha.

The 'simple' part is very often the hardest part. But don't worry, Cloud Imperium have a plan and you will get your wish... eventually.

I wanted to reply to this part specifically.

Bullet travel is predictive, which is probably why they went with physicalised ammunition (and all the goodies that brings, mag stripping and bullet down barrel travel is the relatively easy part!) because the entry point at each server boundary is known, it's velocity, trajectory and exit point is known some forward prediction is possible.

Where it gets really freaky is when they want to put weather going out to the boundaries of a server. Imagine if on one server the wind is kicking up a lot of dust particles and you cross the boundary to clear air, still wind conditions. Very jarring! It's easier to understand why weather conditions will probably come at the end of Server Meshing problem solving. Boundary position choice will be a big factor.

Now add that we have live in game video calling. You could be inside a building on one server talking to a player on the exterior of that building on another server, the weather conditions seen behind the player outside have to match the conditions you can see through the window! Moving clouds!

Yes exactly, well explained. It's suits Entity Graph because of the Object Container heirachical structure. Only change states need to be stored and retrieved from a fixed starting point of a collection of object containers.

This probably / possibly explains why they switched from pad spawning to hangar spawning of ship object containers. With a pad open to view players would potentially see a ship spawned at base state and only then Graph database change state information applied.

This is why they switched from a serialised look up iCache database to Entity Graph which sorts it's database by dependencies. It is a better fit for SC than serialised look up's because SC uses object containers.

Graph based databases are a known technology that was developed to make faster customer database look up's much faster. The generational advance is Entity Graph, taking an application from one field and adapting it for their particular use. It's the kind of out of the box problem solving that Cloud Imperium encourage in their development team and that this community's support enables.

There are the player made advertisements they could show now... and of course there is The Spectrum.

4 hour long? Where did you get that information?

If you understood what the development of Squadron 42 is about you'd realise how meaningless saying you don't care about it is.

You don't think there will be functioning prosthetic eyes in the future? Please don't tell Elon!

The fisherman never gets all the fish in a river, not even close. He'll be happy to bag a couple per day or so. From the fish's point of view the numbers will always be on their side. But these fish have great memories and they can bite back when least expected.

If someone is being successful at bothering NPC's in the main because there is far more of them, there is no way to tell the difference between players and NPC's until you get within range of combat, but also a couple of players pissed off send the bounty up eventually to the point that this guy is attracting interest. He is being studied. The bounty amount makes it worth it for 3 amigo's to take the time to do the prep, they may not be the only team interested in this guy, only the winners get a payout. They know his preferred weapons, they know the places he goes to re-arm and repair. He has no idea who they are. They come into the system where he is and set up, they make their spawn point minutes away from where they know he is likely to be, they stock the local inventory with enough supplies so that they can each die and respawn up to 5 times. Easy done.

Well prepared they just have to catch him un-aware and even if he kills them a few times they can keep him pinned down until he either goes down or runs out of ammunition. If they go down they just respawn, if he goes down he goes to jail. Presuming the size of the bounty matches the crimes he could be there for a while. While he is in jail the 3 amigos set up for another 10 bounties in the same system, each time they send a guy to jail he's out of the system and the threat level to lawful players goes down. While they are active in the system the word goes out to lie low, don't expose yourself to anyone who knows they have a bounty out on them.

There is no limit to the total bounty the Advocacy can place on someone, there is no limit to the number of bounty-hunters who can share a contract. Multiple teams can choose to go after the same guy at once and they aren't even aware the others are after him. Local businesses feeling any disruption will be calling in the Advocacy and local security who will also be making bad guys lives difficult, further gradually reducing overall threat levels - most of the fish will just swim on by. The bad guys will withdraw further and further into areas they feel safer preferring their targets to come to them where they have the numbers.

Eventually an equilibrium will form, groups will have their own turf which they will defend against other bad guys coming in and upsetting the finely balanced apple cart as well as dealing with the good guys. A certain amount of chicanery will be tolerated especially if it is non-violent. A crazy-ass mass murderer jumping into the mix will just piss everyone off. This game has a memory that feeds back to the system in a way others don't. It's a cost benefit analysis, if the cost is too high to deal with lawlessness, they'll tolerate it. If the cost of not dealing with it is too high they will deal with it. The UEE gets taxes from traders, insurance companies don't like paying out. The UEE gets necessary supplies and interruption to those supplies will not be tolerated for long.

The lawless player will learn where to make their flea bites, and stay under the radar, or they will just give up on the idea and become bounty-hunters. For every black hat turned white hat the number of bad guys versus good guys goes down by a factor of 2. Most won't be able to sustain an interest in being lawless for long, they'll just get tired of the prison time or the restrictions it puts on their movement around the verse.

As usual seen in only black and white terms and not taking into account other possible scenarios.

Some WILL go to Pyro of that there is no doubt, which means less for Stanton. To suggest that none will go to Pyro is delusional. Even if they don't stay there permanently the aggregate amount of time they spend out of Stanton reduces overall piracy in Stanton.

Whether CI puts in incentives to get out of the Stanton system or not is also a factor in decisions to get out of Dodge. There are lot's of things they can do which will make that more or less likely. Several existing levers they can pull, they don't need new features to enable it.

Don't be so confident if you aren't taking into account all the possible factors, you just never know. Mere curiosity will be enough to draw significant numbers of players out of Stanton.

Yeah, there are many variations I've only mentioned one but you can mix them all.

Players who go out to mine the asteroid belts (it's a huge area) are virtually impossible to find until they come into a port - what if they don't need to? Or at least don't need to come in fully laden?

There is this notion that escorts will be long and expensive, but that isn't necessarily the case escorts are only required, or worth it, at the points the ship(s) are vulnerable for the period of time that they are vulnerable. In the majority of cases that will be a few hundred kilometres and a matter of minutes. Only a fool is going to swan along in a slow cargo vessel full to the brim on the ecliptic between known POI's. If they get off the ecliptic with a long range QT tank it's virtually impossible to know where they might pop out within range of a docking station mixed in with a load of NPC traffic.

Of course we could have a little PsyOp fun to send the foxes in the wrong direction after a decoy as well. 
 
They never take account of the strategies that can be used against them, they never take account of the tiny probabilities of being in the right place at the right time. They always think they are going to be in their cockpits fingers on fully loaded triggers always on the tail of a victim, when that won't be true for the majority of the time.

You know that's a good idea, there is that possibility, but it has a couple of flaws.
1. How much trouble would it be to move?
2. You only need to add one more layer of complexity - time, the frequency is up to the organiser. (imagine predicting which elevator floor to choose to arrive at in your hotel before you even set off from the airport). An Endeavor would have to stay on station and repeatedly scan to try to see moving targets and any players using them can choose their departure targets at random. How likely is that? Hours and hours of scanning to catch the odd random player and vector people (and the required resources) to them in time to catch them, while ignoring thousands of potential NPC targets? It's the scale that affords protection not only of the volume but also of time, not just the fact that it is off the beaten track.

It always makes me laugh internally when people dream up ideas that don't take account of probability. If a group has to man and resource an Endeavor that is just a little less they can use to attack other players with. Another time-sink they have to absorb.

There are 4 planets, 12 moons, 20 La Grange points in Stanton and there will be at least 1x Jump Gate when Pyro goes in, that means the chances of picking the right point is 1 in 37 if you only use those POI's, now take account that there is a 50% possibility of being above or below the ecliptic so that becomes a 1 in 74 chance if the scan range isn't equal to maximum height above or below the ecliptic, with only 8 ships you can switch the route every hour, every 15 minutes, every 5 minutes etc. The Endeavor can't scan wide at long range certainly not with a telescope, a sky survey would take a long time - something that is changing position every 15 minutes would be impossible to keep a track of, they could maybe focus on one ship but that won't help them much - finding that ship doesn't give any other part of the network and it's only valid at the time the scan is completed if the network isn't static. Where are they going to place their Endeavor? Stanton is 5 AU across, Pyro is 13 AU across, how can they predict where a moving target is going to be if they have no inside knowledge of the plans to move? An organised group (as few as 9 players) can switch on and off a whole of Stanton route according to their own schedule and the other players merely using it don't even need to know in advance.

Also it's not Krakens they should use, that would be wasteful.

A couple of days ago a player made a very short video on Youtube. He was testing PES on the PTU. He pointed out that he had logged out of a ship at a location and a couple of days later had landed on the same server to find the ship was exactly where he left it. There's something that you could have done even in 3,17.4 to avoid contact with other ships, with PES it is an order of magnitude easier. Take a moment to think about that, can you figure out how that makes it possible that no player has to come within a million kilometres of another player while in transit if they don't want to?

If you are 10km away they have around 8.5 seconds or more (at 1000m/s) to jump out (from anywhere) to a place you can't possibly follow and can't predict. It's not combat logging if you don't get within weapons targeting range, and it's not combat logging to QT away while there is no combat engagement. Master mode is just going to make that much easier. When the jump gates go in, even one of them, it just gets easier. I could sit your average knuckle-dragger down and explain the method step by step with coloured blocks, teaching little memory rhymes and still the chances of them finding me, much less catching me, are less than 1 in a million in Stanton and exponentially more improbable when Pyro goes in.

With that kind of persistence 2 players can make it so they never need to use the ecliptic again and 3 players can set up a permanent secret route on a server no-one else is ever likely to access or find. An organisation can set up routes that are only known and accessible to them, they could have a hold full of invited passengers and still only the trusted pilots know how to use those safe routes. No-one outside of that group of 8+ players would have a clue that they are even there.

Now tell me how easy it is to be frequently ganking other players! Pirates are going to ignore all that NPC in transit traffic on the million to one off-chance they are going to find some players? I don't think so! You might catch a few noobs every now and then.

Some of it is, yes. There are armistice zones. You can get off the ecliptic and avoid the high traffic routes. It really is big compared to RUST, I get an icon on screen if there is a ship within 10KM range, there isn't even a map that big to allow 10KM range notification of potential conflict in RUST the absolute furthest you can get from another player is 5.657km if you are both at opposing corners. A 20km diameter bubble in the void that is the Stanton system is a miniscule pin-prick, they could increase the number of outposts by a factor of 100 so that there are thousands of them on a single moon and you'd still be hundreds of kilometres apart. I can go around in the game for hours and not see another player even now and if I do see them I get warning early enough to just go elsewhere. Shipboard bed logging means I may never see another player. There are communication channels and security monitoring stations with automatic IFF, there are security forces and Call to Arms mission. There are assist beacons for players, if bad actors can use them to set traps, so can bounty-hunters.

All they would have to do is remove (or make very expensive and difficult to find) hacking chips and the whole balance would shift, now there is persistence a player who goes lawless could potentially stay lawless for good (they could give you a period of probation post prison release), and that is just one link in that long chain of variables. If a history of breaking the law gets you barred from landing zones and ATC you now have a very different experience... they don't need to add a single new feature to do that, they can use what already exists.They won't flip these security switches now because there is nowhere else to go, but if they have Pyro in they only need to flip a couple of those switches to make it far more comfortable outside of Stanton. Now players can choose where they want to go.

It's been done over and over - which leads to one conclusion, either this person has not been following development or the discussion of it, or they are deliberately repeating points made in other threads currently on these forums being answered right now.

You want another paragraph repeating the same information for this particular un-insightful recreation of FUD? OK. Anyone else who knows the game development and plans need not continue, I'm not saying anything new or revelatory beyond here:

One small moon in Star Citizen is huge compared to a RUST map, and the space between those planetary bodies is absolutely huge compared to any other game where you can only travel POI to POI. It isn't easy to get off the ecliptic right now, but it is doable, later it will be easier.

If a player is off-world and out in the asteroid belt it's almost certain they won't encounter anyone that volume is huge and scanning range is tiny in comparison, neither NPC or Live player is going to chance upon you very often, until the player decides to come to a place to sell their stuff and / or buy. In which case you plan ahead.

This is the calculation the small-game-minded just don't seem to be able to do - take all the factors, and just like the Drake Equation, consider a final probability of an outcome. There are so many factors to take into account that even with millions on the same shard the chances of you having a constantly negative experience are virtually zero, especially if you keep your wits about you.

There is no flight in RUST you are limited to crawling over a tiny 2D map.

There is no shield system in RUST. There are no offline security beacons to alert defenders attacking your property while you are logged off, in SC those security beacons come as standard with high security area land claims.

There is no global communication system in RUST, there is no ARK database, there is no Spectrum keeping you up to the minute informed about what is going on system-wide, there are no combat assist beacons or medical assistance beacons. No local on-going threat assessments posted to Spectrum constantly.

There are no NPC law enforcement agencies in RUST which are connected to both the overall economy and local economy, and there are no prisons or prison planets. In Star Citizen nothing is magicked into existence except raw ores, everything has to be manufactured and transported. The game is aware of any limitations in those market forces and can react as appropriately if you disrupt necessary UEE supply enough you will see increased security. Cloud Imperium developers can and will add impediments to those who try to take over an area, they can make a star throw off large amounts of radiation, they can collapse jump points into a system or even create a local pandemic... these features don't exist in any connected form in any other game.

There is no NPC run passenger transport system to holiday destinations or 'must see' places of interest, no high security areas you would be locked out of if you have a bad reputation and criminal history. If you have a choice between constantly having to pay to skulk around a hi sec system or area, with ever increasing amount of security chasing you around, or go operate in a lo security area which one will you choose most often? If you can get your jollies as a bounty hunter just as easily, which will you choose? A lawful gameplay that is not restricting or a lawless playstyle is that is severely restricting with no guaranteed pay-out and no access to security systems and equipment to help you along?

There are no annual and local events like racing - including Murray Cup events, or IAE, or Invictus Launch Week, Luminalia or any more in-game events they choose to create.

There are no secure zones housing both players and vendors you can only get to through multiple security gates. There's no facial ID scanning and security gate linked central database in RUST.

This isn't even an exhaustive list of the differences.

First build your strawman argument, then completely ignore any relevant information and continue to blindly insist the similarities are valid.

There is no comparison what-so-ever between RUST and Star Citizen, there certainly won't be any when the game is feature complete, it has never been suggested the SC developers want it to be comparable to RUST.

If you strain to understand the project at all, then you ought to accept that that any comparisons you make to other games and your assessment of what the future game will be like are simply BS, they are a solipsism only you inhabit. Indeed they are so woefully uninformed it looks a lot like the oft-trotted-out FUD-ster talking points trolling.

The Roadmap has the deliverable 'DGS Crash Recovery'. This means that if a server crashes you will stay in your game client while another server identical to the one that crashed is spun up and you will be seamlessly transferred to it where you can just carry on. This is the earliest form of the Server Meshing. All the player will notice is that for around a minute the game seems to stop responding, then it will carry on as if nothing happened.

If your 30K is due to a network disconnect it depends upon how long you were disconnected and they haven't said yet what they will do in that case.

I'm am not stating either way what your intention is, but I know there are those who want to spread that fear for reasons other than simple discussion. Unfortunately the less informed will absorb that negativity and think it is more of an issue than it really is. The way to counter this is to give better information to those seeking information.

Even trying to make comparisons is pointless. you have listed several features and said how Star Citizen is similar - but what about all the coming features you haven't included? The aim of Star Citizen is to give players choices, choices you don't get in the other games. You can choose to stay in safe areas, or go the risky route. You can even choose to stay put and never go anywhere, you don't have to fly a ship or shoot a gun. The amount of choice will be endless. The aim is to make local knowledge the key to any decisions the player makes, if you don't take the time to study your environment you potentially will suffer the consequences, this is the sort of depth most other games don't have.

There is a universe wide communications network that is always keeping people up to date with what is happening where.

You can have your own home base in SC.

You can move about the verse with hired / public transport, not likely to suffer much in the way of griefing since any disruption to in-game business trade will be met with security force intervention. Even if those transports are attacked it doesn't entail losing a whole lot to the passenger does it?

..and what about those levels of security force intervention? You have private, local and UEE with security checkpoints where-ever you go, as well as random checkpoints.

Are there prisons in Sea of Thieves?

Those who claim they can lord it over the lawful players always talk about combat in ships and in groups, but there will be times when they aren't in their ships, when they aren't going around mob-handed. They only have to be caught once to spend days perhaps weeks in prison. Every time they use a terminal their location is pinged and the bounty-hunters would be just as happy to come for them on foot.

What those who compare to other games completely forget is that the Living Breathing Universe will be full off things players will want to do and see, like luxury holidays and a Murray Cup Racing calendar, IAE and Invictus Week, and more - there won't be any quick wipe with a hack key, you could spend weeks in a prison. Your crime history stays with you for as long as your character lives. If you choose a lawless life it's for good and it will make a difference to where you can go and what you can do in the game universe.

When most of these who think they will be pirates give up on the idea, because they'll realise they can get their pew pew jollies just as much by being a bounty-hunter, which doesn't bring all the restrictions lawlessness does, then it's most likely going to be the dogs eating the dogs.

Every time someone tries to compare SC to other games they completely forget how big this game is not just in play space, but in the sheer amount of time and money sinks in the game. 10% of time taken away from from griefing means 10% more players have a happy time. Make a lawless player have to run from bounty-hunters 50% of the time and you have a player base that is over 50% happy. They will have to source their supplies from places in less safe areas and they'll cost more, they will take more effort to find.

These are calculations the small game brained don't take into account. They keep making the mistake of comparing other games to what SC is now, not what it will become.

A lot of these threads are just deliberate fear-mongering from ignorance.

I know they don't now, but they will in the future.

f lawless players are pinging they are giving up their location... and intent. As the OP says, an alert crew doing their job means the attacker has the harder job. Small animals survive in the wild even though they don't have the fastest legs, the biggest claws or the biggest teeth.

The fear of 'what ifs' stems from being uninformed about what is planned.

Have you actually truly bothered reading that webpage you linked? I very much doubt it. What a waste of time. A lazy effort with no attempt at sorting or managing duplicates. It has a category - 'in Alpha'. It's ALL IN ALPHA! there shouldn't be any 'green' on that chart!

There are loads of things on it that say they aren't implemented in the game - when they are. 'Large Scale Dynamic Events' is listed as 'stagnant'! Field medical devices listed as 'Stagnant'. Jails and prisons, Prison stations - listed twice - as Stagnant! 'Missile targeting systems' - listed as 'Stagnant'! 'Accurately see large cities on planet surfaces - listed as Stagnant! 'Gravity zones' is Stagnant? 'Revive wounded or incapacitated players' is Stagnant? 'Components intercommunication' - Not Implemented? Exactly how are your shields, engines and guns drawing power, how do you know when your shields are down and your guns are overheated? 'Unrestricted view distance' - if you can't see to the horizon you need spectacles! 'Ore refining and processing mechanics' - not implemented? You need to do some catching up mate! 'Complex mining gameplay' - Not implemented. Are you serious? There is another entry 'Mining Profession' on the same chart as 'In alpha'. 'Weapons emit exactly from where barrel is pointing' - listed as 'Compromised' - They do! 'NPC security patrols - Not Implemented. Really? Who keeps telling me to halt my ship then? Santa Claus? 'Tractor beam players' - Not Implemented. Strange I've been using something to pick up my storage boxes.

Deep breath there's more they've forgotten are already in!
'Gas giants - Stagnant!' ROFL, they crack me up! 'Different starting planets -Stagnant!' ROFL this one is so out of date it has a beard down to it's toes! 'Transfer fees - Stagnant'. Why do they take a cut if send someone UEC then? 'Separate keybind profiles - Stagnant', 'Ship-to-ship docking - Stagnant'. Except the ones that can. 'Player to player trading - Stagnant'. No-one stopping you! Quite a few have been selling guns and armour out of their ships and backpacks. 'Hadesian Artifact - Stagnant' Odd it's in my inventory. 'Respawn button- Stagnant'. FYI, it's the backspace key. 'NPC AI - Stagnant' Really? 'Organization infiltration - Stagnant'. Nothing stopping you, go right ahead. 'Different types of cargo containers (volume) - Stagnant. Yeah right! 'Wreckage as a navigational hazard - Stagnant' Better not tell that to the guys going out to the Reclaimers then! 'In-game voice communication - Stagnant' - You have to be joking! 'Immersive transfer of cargo to ships hold - stagnant' What were all those things players were taking to INS Jericho from the Xenothreat attack site? 'NPCs prevent organization conflict in safe zones - Stagnant' Never been shot by Hurston security eh? Good boy! 'Players won't always be able to run from combat - Stagnant. Better tell all those guys complaining about being griefed! 'Immersive buying of ships - Stagnant. Good grief! 'Tell ships to drop cargo - Stagnant' guess those pirates won't be happy to hear what they've been doing isn't actually in the game. 'Character ratings factored into mission system - Stagnant'. Oh Really? 'Shuttles for larger ships to interact with stations and planets - Stagnant'. er.. Pisces anyone? 'Short range voice communication and ship hailing - Stagnant'. Ha Ha Ha!.. bullshit! 'Stealth takedowns - Stagnant', 'Co-Op in Arena Commander when bigger ships are added' No When questions! Joking, it's already in. 'Drag other players - Stagnant' No, it's in the game. 'Cockpit decorations - bobbleheads, photographs, dinosaurs, fuzzy dice, nose art, posters' - Stagnant'. We got the bobble heads and fuzzies! 'Build professional sound studio - Stagnant'. Guess you haven't heard about the new offices in Manchester? 'Individual ship components damage states - Stagnant. We don't have ship components? 'Capture bigger ships - Stagnant' Oh yes you can!


There are loads of duplicates, multiple entries of some with the exact same wording! Eating, and Eating and Drink as two separate items - listed as 'Stagnant! What the hell is that person on? It's 'In Alpha!', 'Loan mechanic' and 'loaning out ships to other players' listed a Stagnant - you can loan your ships and any other equipment to anybody you want. 'Mission sharing - listed twice - as not implemented! Isn't farming and agriculture the same thing?

There are loads of things so vague they are meaningless, 'richer story line' for what? 'PvE Encounters' - listed s Stagnant! 'Diverse NPC actions' - Not Implemented. Really? 'Nothing in-game you can only buy with real money' listed as 'Compromised'... and that's a bad thing?

There are loads of Squadron 42 only related features about which we have no idea yet, and things in Squadron 42 they list as not achieved when we've been shown them. 'Squadron 42: Chris Roberts cameo' - listed as 'Stagnant!' good grief! how would anyone know outside of CI?

There are loads of things we have always known wouldn't come until a final release or after. Books, novela, manuals, modding tools, Orchestral Music CD. Final release game disks.

There are loads of absolutely stupid and idiotically pointless entries: 'Mantle for AMD' - why if we get Vulkan? 'Benefits for ejecting from a ship about to explode' (Borat! is that you?) - is stagnant? 'Accurate skybox (Constellations)', how on Earth do any of us know what the skybox looks like from a star system we've never actually been to? - listed as 'Stagnant. 'Body language' - listed as 'Stagnant!' 'First person combat on select lawless planets' we have first person combat anywhere you want outside of armistice zones! 'Sleeping' who wants to play a game where they just see themselves sleeping? listed as Not Implemented, Duh! 'Mark Hamill on the poster' is 'Stagnant'? 'Cash sales only for new concept ships and top tier capital ships' - listed as broken. You just try suggesting that as a feature in these forums! 'Star Citizen HOTAS from Mad Catz' listed as 'Broken - how is MadCatz folding anything to do with Cloud imperium Games? 'Levels: Planetside module' - Compromised. What on Earth are they talking about? 'Added content after final release - Stagnant. Duh! it says 'final release'. 'Build the game backers are dreaming of - Stagnant' Well they are building the game I've been dreaming of and I'm a backer! 'Fly from space to planet as a cinematic - Stagnant' No-one wanted it! 'Supply and Demand' - 'Stagnant' SMH.

Some are just plain made up, there has never been a plan for runtime generation of procedural planets. 'Dynamic population count' - Stagnant - whoever suggested there would be such a thing? 'Player designed outfits' - Stagnant, has never been suggested as a feature,it was suggested by the early community and as usual CI said 'Maybe' which means no. '20 million AI agents' - Stagnant. Nobody ever said there would be 20 million!'

TL:DR (and don't you need it!)
It's very clear no-one has bothered to go back and re-check all the listings in years. The categories 'In Alpha' and 'Achieved' are the same. It's also very easy to make a list of things not implemented, especially if you duplicate and make shit up, and give a bad looking percentage if no-one bothers to add new features that are actually in the game. The icing on this odd smelling dried out fruitcake: 'RSI Museum' listed as Kickstarter Stretch Goal - 'Compromised'. I hope you start a thread suggesting CI should drop everything and get to work on that right away!

More waste of time FUD-spreading disinformation crap... and you've been following this for years?

Which CPU do you have, others have reported issues like the ones you mention but a common theme seems to low thread count low speed older CPU's.

While I understand anyone's frustration at the length of time the project is taking, don't we all it was my 61st birthday yesterday, there is a point to note about that tracker - it doesn't include any work done that we are not told about. Of course the pessimistic assumption is always that there isn't any but I do not believe that is so. It also fails to take into account those features that have core tech dependencies, when those core techs go in we will find out more about what can be finally revealed. Too much is hidden behind Squadron 42 'spoilers' so that it is near impossible to make an accurate estimate of progress, however you feel about that, it is a fact.

The claim is often made that Chris deliberately gave false estimates, but there is video of him explaining why he chose to expand the scope of the project he had no idea that the community would be so wildly successful in providing for more funding and support than he ever expected back in 2012, it had more to do with the happenstance of opportunity aligning with the backer communities wishes than any pre-conceived notions he had at the start of the project. Judge that as you will, it is still a fact that he acknowledges he is building the community's game... not merely his first stated intent at his dream game.

Just because it hard to understand doesn't mean it is not true. If were simply a case of content additions or expansions then you could reasonably take the view that this live service is in some form of released state, but it isn't, there are core tech pillars still to go in and people need to understand that. Understanding that also brings into focus the scale of what is being made. While it may seem those of us who understand this are dogmatic in reinforcing this notion it needs to be remembered that every single time someone interacts with this game project those advisories regarding the state of development are in place, those who just click past them are no less dogmatic in insisting it isn't the reality.

The argument regarding the time it is taking is irrelevant because duration of a project is relative, you want cheap quick and easy? Yes you can expect that quickly, but this project has never been about cheap quick and easy.

It has always been my contention that they have worked on many more systems than we are aware of.

I don't disagree that a new player experience should be undertaken at some stage by CI, but is that really appropriate in an Alpha that is still for testing and will change considerable over the coming year?

Yes but how often? The premise often forwarded by PVP-centric players is that it will be always a continual unavoidable occurrence, I don't agree with that, it discounts any forward planning players can use to lessen risk. Those wishing to engage in frequent gun action are going to hang out in high traffic areas, they aren't going to spend many hours out in the boonies on the off-chance of catching someone especially if the AI high traffic waterways are filled with bigger juicier fish.

Also while the increased AI traffic may bring more attackers, it also brings more bounty hunters, Advocacy, or even the navy - these are the unavoidable time-sinks the lawless players will face, directing their resources and time away from players. The game designers will balance this to avoid the gankfest often assumed by some.

I don't agree with that premise. It depends upon choices the player makes as to whether that will happen or not. It is Chris' stated intent that the most valuable resource to a players strategic planning will be local knowledge of any area they intend to enter. Even the AI will make a judgement whether it is worth their time and expense to operate in high security areas, and whether to allocate more security forces to quell illegal activity.

Word count and reader fatigue is a factor when composing a coherent reply, the subject matter doesn't lend itself to brevity. Your argument is equally valid though I feel defensive (avoidance) strategies not limited to upgrade choices, convoys, escorts and shields - not to mention security and law enforcement - are often overlooked.

You may note I also didn't go into more detail about ammo counts and costs (the cost benefit analysis of deciding to attack which even future AI will undertake), guns overheating, component and weapons wear and tear, the piping and relay systems and component targeting that obviates the 'banging away at any part of the hull' strategy, also the effect that subsystem targeting mixed with multi-crew efforts to make use of redundant systems in their defensive actions. High security versus low security activity.

My aim was to provide a 'brief' 
 
 insight into the multi-level nuances coming in the future. Even now the larger ships are equipped with redundancies to outlast attackers, we just can't use them to full effect.

Cloud Imperium are adding a couple of features into the mix that few other games of this nature do - attrition and forward planning.

I understand that you might think I did not address that, but I did read the other replies before mine that I felt addressed that sufficiently well so that my aim was to add information (or at least another viewpoint) not repeat it.

We get those 'people' coming to Spectrum on a regular basis. Some sadly are just very anti-CIG, or actually Chris Roberts in particular, so much so they hang around in echo chambers to reinforce the bordering on hate for the project and even this community. They are a group with a definite goal in mind, trying to drive people away.

Some are the people who listen to that noise, what we call FUD (Fear, Uncertainty, Doubt) spreaders and because they don't know more detail about the project and it's aims they look at what the alpha is now and conclude the FUD-spreaders must have a point.

You on the other hand seem to have absorbed information from CI and your analysis is spot on. There are many factors that go into making what this game is to become and they are not in yet, but they are planned. So Kudos to you.

Armour will indeed make a difference as will the TTK which will be longer and much more about disabling ships for boarding actions etc.

There is another facet to the keyboard-worriers thinking that is not taking into account what the game is to become, it's going to be massive and so the chances of having encounters with hostiles will be a lot less than they surmise, this is where you'll find the most contentious arguments raging, in those discussions where some participants just cannot do anything else but extrapolate from what the current small fishbowl Alpha is. They also discount the fact that game universe is going to be overwhelmingly populated by AI NPC's and their role is to balance the forces.

When you have a more robust law system, with more significant punishments than a quick trip to a rehabilitation facility the opportunistic aggressors will learn there are more consequences to their actions than they anticipated, those systems (including the full Living Breathing Universe), aren't nearly ready for primetime yet. As with all good experiences there are many layers and much more nuance than the average gamer expects. There are those who argue the 'Arcady' version of what the game is going to be because they actually want it that way, they will find CI have catered fro them in Arena Commander and Star Marine, and of course Squadron 42.

When Quarterdeck prison planet comes, when their are higher penalties for aggression, better armour and as you say a more nuanced multi-crew experience, more AI population that is indistinguishable from live players, more activities to engage in which will be time sinks for even the most ardent PvP'ers, even just going around and witnessing more in-universe 'goings on, and more balancing of the final project overall we will see a change.

So no, you're not missing something, but many others are and it's a fact the uninformed do tend to be noisy about their concerns.

This is the 500 Million dollar question!

Why did we have to crowdfund the game no-one else would dream of making?

Depends on what your aim is, if it is to rush out a traditional game for release, then no it wouldn't be necessary. But that was never the aim of the project.

This is another one of those 'Barista' questions.

The issue isn't that you may not understand (traditional) game development but rather what the difference is between the way NPC's in Squadron 42 / Star Citizen undertake their tasks.

As you imply, in traditional games an NPC is scripted to perform a function in a specific area. That NPC will follow it's script identically each time, there will be a breakout animation (for example if the NPC is bumped or talked to, or engaged in combat) and then it goes back to following the script. 94 weeks would be a ridiculous amount of time if that was all this entailed.

This isn't the way NPC's are programmed in SQ42 / SC. They are environment aware, their tasks are part of their 'whole day' existence which they react to dynamically, they won't do the same thing time and time again. The mop and bucket guy in Squadron 42 for example is an interesting character, we've been told in the vertical slice mission, he isn't just a janitor - to put it in other game terms - he isn't just a Heimskr.

The process for making this character is the same they use for making other character behaviours... the 'mop and bucket' reference is their internal shorthand for this programming of active NPC's that will respond to any change in their environment and live a 24 hour existence.

There are many others who can give more detail than I can but IIRC the block size on Gen4 drives have caused issues, there is a registry fix for it.

What type of drive are you running the game on?

Are you using a phone or tablet to post? Just a friendly FYI - no formatting is showing, it's just a text wall.